1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1992 May 29;185(1):9-15. doi: 
10.1016/s0006-291x(05)80947-7.

In vitro assays of three carotenogenic membrane-bound enzymes from Escherichia 
coli transformed with different crt genes.

Fraser PD(1), Sandmann G.

Author information:
(1)Lehrstuhl für Physiologie und Biochemie der Pflanzen, Universität Konstanz, 
Germany.

In vitro assays have been developed for three membrane-bound carotenogenic 
enzymes, phytoene desaturase, lycopene cyclase and beta-carotene hydroxylase, 
expressed in Escherichia coli. Transformants of E. coli containing different 
deletion constructs of the Erwinia herbicola carotenogenic gene cluster were 
employed, allowing the estimation of enzyme activities without interference from 
subsequent reactions. New HPLC systems were developed to separate substrates and 
reaction products enabling the determination of radioactivity on-line. The newly 
developed assays facilitate the purification of these enzymes which have never 
been isolated before.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-291x(05)80947-7
PMID: 1599492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Z Naturforsch C J Biosci. 1991 Nov-Dec;46(11-12):1045-51. doi: 
10.1515/znc-1991-11-1219.

Functional complementation in Escherichia coli of different phytoene desaturase 
genes and analysis of accumulated carotenes.

Linden H(1), Misawa N, Chamovitz D, Pecker I, Hirschberg J, Sandmann G.

Author information:
(1)Lehrstuhl für Physiologie und Biochemie der Pflanzen, Universität Konstanz, 
Bundesrepublik Deutschland.

Three different phytoene desaturase genes, from Rhodobacter capsulatus, Erwinia 
uredovora, and Synechococcus PCC 7942, have been functionally complemented with 
a gene construct from E. uredovora which encodes all enzymes responsible for 
formation of 15-cis phytoene in Escherichia coli. As indicated by the 
contrasting reaction products detected in the pigmented E. coli cells after 
co-transformation, a wide functional diversity of these three different types of 
phytoene desaturases can be concluded. The carotenes formed by the phytoene 
desaturase from R. capsulatus were trans-neurosporene with three additional 
double bonds and two cis isomers. Furthermore, small amounts of three 
zeta-carotene isomers (2 double bonds more than phytoene) and phytofluene 
(15-cis and all-trans with + 1 double bond) were detected as intermediates. When 
the subsequent genes from E. uredovora which encode for lycopene cyclase and 
beta-carotene hydroxylase were present, neurosporene, the phytoene desaturase 
product of R. capsulatus, was subsequently converted to the monocyclic 
beta-zeacarotene and its monohydroxylation product. The most abundant carotene 
resulting from phytoene desaturation by the E. uredovora enzyme was 
trans-lycopene together with a cis isomer. In addition, bisdehydrolycopene was 
also formed. The reaction products of Synechococcus phytoene desaturase were two 
cis isomers of zeta-carotene and only small amounts of trans-zeta-carotene 
including 15-cis. The I50 values for flurtamone and diphenylamine to inhibit 
phytoene desaturation were determined and differential inhibition was observed 
for diphenylamine.

DOI: 10.1515/znc-1991-11-1219
PMID: 1817513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Biol Chem. 1991 Sep 15;266(26):17072-8.

On the mechanism of the lycopene isomerase/cyclase reaction in Narcissus 
pseudonarcissus L. chromoplasts.

Beyer P(1), Kröncke U, Nievelstein V.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Biologie II, Universität Freiburg, Federal Republic of Germany.

The lycopene cyclase reaction was investigated in Narcissus pseudonarcissus L. 
membranes using the terminal desaturation product of the system, 
7,9,9',7'-tetra-cis-lycopene (prolycopene) as substrate. The enzymatically 
formed bicyclic carotenes were trans configured, so the overall reaction 
consists of two individual processes, isomerization and cyclization. The two 
reactions were experimentally distinguished by use of the inhibitor 
[2-(p-chlorophenylthio)triethylammonium chloride. NADPH, the essential cofactor 
for the overall reaction, originates from the plastid glycolytic pathway. It is 
shown that NADPH exhibits its function at the stage of isomerization and is also 
able to promote reduction of the prolycopene substrate in vitro.

PMID: 1894603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 1991 Mar 1;62(2-3):157-61. doi: 
10.1016/0378-1097(91)90151-y.

Mapping of a carotenogenic gene cluster from Erwinia herbicola and functional 
identification of six genes.

Schnurr G(1), Schmidt A, Sandmann G.

Author information:
(1)Lehrstuhl für Physiologie und Biochemie der Pflanzen, Universität Konstanz, 
F.R.G.

Six genes have been mapped and identified by hybridization or by carotenoid 
analysis of deletion mutants on a 9 kb chromosomal fragment originating from 
Erwinia herbicola Eho 10. These genes include crtB, E and I which have been 
formerly described for Rhodobacter, and three new ones: crtZ encoding lycopene 
cyclase, crtH for beta-carotene hydroxylase, and crtG for zeaxanthin 
glycosilase. Their arrangement on the plasmid has been elucidated.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1097(91)90151-y
PMID: 2040425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Plant J. 1995 Sep;8(3):417-24. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.1995.08030417.x.

Metabolism of cyclic carotenoids: a model for the alteration of this 
biosynthetic pathway in Capsicum annuum chromoplasts.

Hugueney P(1), Badillo A, Chen HC, Klein A, Hirschberg J, Camara B, Kuntz M.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Biologie Moléculaire des Plantes du CNRS, Strasbourg, France.

The biosynthetic pathway of cyclic carotenoid is known to be quantitatively and 
qualitatively different in the non-green plastids of Capsicum annuum fruits 
compared with chloroplasts. Here, the cloning is described of a novel cDNA from 
this organism, which encodes an enzyme catalyzing the cyclization of lycopene to 
beta-carotene when expressed in Escherichia coli. The corresponding gene is 
constitutively expressed during fruit development. Significant amino acid 
sequence identity was observed between this enzyme and capsanthin/capsorubin 
synthase which is involved in the synthesis of the species-specific red 
carotenoids of C. annuum fruits. The latter enzyme was found also to possess a 
lycopene beta-cyclase activity when expressed in E. coli. A model is proposed 
for the origin of the capsanthin/capsorubin synthase gene and the role of this 
enzyme, together with the newly cloned lycopene cyclase, in the specific 
re-channeling of linear carotenoids into beta-cyclic carotenoids in C. annuum 
ripening fruits.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.1995.08030417.x
PMID: 7550379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. FEBS Lett. 1995 Jun 26;367(2):158-62. doi: 10.1016/0014-5793(95)00510-g.

Complete separation of the beta,epsilon- and beta,beta-carotenoid biosynthetic 
pathways by a unique mutation of the lycopene cyclase in the green alga, 
Scenedesmus obliquus.

Bishop NI(1), Urbig T, Senger H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany and Plant Pathology, Oregon State University, Corvallis 
97331, USA.

The mutant, C-2A'-34, lacks the beta, epsilon-carotenoids, alpha-carotene, 
lutein and loroxanthin. When grown under heterotrophic or mixotropic conditions 
this strain develops significantly higher levels of beta-carotene and 
violaxanthin than does the original developmental mutant of Scenedesmus, C-2A'. 
The decrease in chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b observed in C-2A'-34 is 
accompanied by the near absence of the LHC. The light intensity dependence of 
greening of this strain is comparable to that of C-2A'; the loss of the 
beta,epsilon-carotenoids and modification of the pool of beta,beta-carotenoids 
neither prevent the proximal pigment-protein complexes of photosystems I and II 
from developing nor cause any short term photosensitivity. The increase in the 
beta,beta-carotenoids in C-2A'-34 apparently compensates for the loss of the 
beta,epsilon-carotenoids required in formation of the proximal and distal 
antennae systems but not in the LHCs.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-5793(95)00510-g
PMID: 7796911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Gen Genet. 1994 Nov 15;245(4):406-16. doi: 10.1007/BF00302252.

Functional assignment of Erwinia herbicola Eho10 carotenoid genes expressed in 
Escherichia coli.

Hundle B(1), Alberti M, Nievelstein V, Beyer P, Kleinig H, Armstrong GA, Burke 
DH, Hearst JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley 94720.

Erwinia herbicola is a nonphotosynthetic bacterium that is yellow pigmented due 
to the presence of carotenoids. When the Erwinia carotenoid biosynthetic genes 
are expressed in Escherichia coli, this bacterium also displays a yellow 
phenotype. The DNA sequence of the plasmid pPL376, carrying the entire Erwinia 
carotenoid gene cluster, has been found to contain 12 open reading frames 
(ORFs). Six of the ORFs have been identified as carotenoid biosynthesis genes 
that code for all the enzymes required for conversion of farnesyl pyrophosphate 
(FPP) to zeaxanthin diglucoside via geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate, phytoene, 
lycopene, beta-carotene, and zeaxanthin. These enzymatic steps were assigned 
after disruption of each ORF by a specific mutation and analysis of the 
accumulated intermediates. Carotenoid intermediates were identified by the 
absorption spectra of the colored components and by high pressure liquid 
chromatographic analysis. The six carotenoid genes are arranged in at least two 
operons. The gene coding for beta-carotene hydroxylase is transcribed in the 
opposite direction from that of the other carotenoid genes and overlaps with the 
gene for phytoene synthase.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00302252
PMID: 7808389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Plant Cell. 1994 Aug;6(8):1107-21. doi: 10.1105/tpc.6.8.1107.

Molecular structure and enzymatic function of lycopene cyclase from the 
cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp strain PCC7942.

Cunningham FX Jr(1), Sun Z, Chamovitz D, Hirschberg J, Gantt E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany, University of Maryland, College Park 20742.

A gene encoding the enzyme lycopene cyclase in the cyanobacterium Synechococcus 
sp strain PCC7942 was mapped by genetic complementation, cloned, and sequenced. 
This gene, which we have named crtL, was expressed in strains of Escherichia 
coli that were genetically engineered to accumulate the carotenoid precursors 
lycopene, neurosporene, and zeta-carotene. The crtL gene product converts the 
acyclic hydrocarbon lycopene into the bicyclic beta-carotene, an essential 
component of the photosynthetic apparatus in oxygen-evolving organisms and a 
source of vitamin A in human and animal nutrition. The enzyme also converts 
neurosporene to the monocyclic beta-zeacarotene but does not cyclize 
zeta-carotene, indicating that desaturation of the 7-8 or 7'-8' carbon-carbon 
bond is required for cyclization. The bleaching herbicide 
2-(4-methylphenoxy)triethylamine hydrochloride (MPTA) effectively inhibits both 
cyclization reactions. A mutation that confers resistance to MPTA in 
Synechococcus sp PCC7942 was identified as a point mutation in the promoter 
region of crtL. The deduced amino acid sequence of lycopene cyclase specifies a 
polypeptide of 411 amino acids with a molecular weight of 46,125 and a pI of 
6.0. An amino acid sequence motif indicative of FAD utilization is located at 
the N terminus of the polypeptide. DNA gel blot hybridization analysis indicated 
a single copy of crtL in Synechococcus sp PCC7942. Other than the FAD binding 
motif, the predicted amino acid sequence of the cyanobacterial lycopene cyclase 
bears little resemblance to the two known lycopene cyclase enzymes from 
nonphotosynthetic bacteria. Preliminary results from DNA gel blot hybridization 
experiments suggest that, like two earlier genes in the pathway, the 
Synechococcus gene encoding lycopene cyclase is homologous to plant and algal 
genes encoding this enzyme.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.6.8.1107
PMCID: PMC160505
PMID: 7919981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Microbiology (Reading). 1994 Feb;140 ( Pt 2):331-9. doi: 
10.1099/13500872-140-2-331.

Analysis of the gene cluster encoding carotenoid biosynthesis in Erwinia 
herbicola Eho13.

To KY(1), Lai EM, Lee LY, Lin TP, Hung CH, Chen CL, Chang YS, Liu ST.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Chang-Gung Medical College, 
Kwei-Shan, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

Erwinia herbicola is known to synthesize carotenoids and gives an 
orange-coloured phenotype. These carotenoids play a role in the protection of 
the cells from the damage caused by near-UV irradiation in nature. The genes 
encoding these carotenoids in E. herbicola Eho13 are clustered in a 7 kb DNA 
fragment. The complete sequence of this fragment has been determined. DNA 
sequence analysis revealed that the entire sequence contains at least five 
genes, which are transcribed in the same direction. These five genes are 
organized in the order crtE-crtX-crtY-crtI-crtB. A gene fusion study showed that 
two different regions in this 7 kb gene cluster contain promoter activity. 
Primer-extension analysis identified two transcription start sites, located 147 
bp upstream from the first gene of the cluster, crtE, and within the last gene 
of the cluster, crtB. An RNA-PCR study suggested that the five crt genes were 
organized in an operon and were transcribed from the promoter upstream from 
crtE.

DOI: 10.1099/13500872-140-2-331
PMID: 8180698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. FEBS Lett. 1993 Aug 9;328(1-2):130-8. doi: 10.1016/0014-5793(93)80980-9.

Cloning and functional expression in Escherichia coli of a cyanobacterial gene 
for lycopene cyclase, the enzyme that catalyzes the biosynthesis of 
beta-carotene.

Cunningham FX Jr(1), Chamovitz D, Misawa N, Gantt E, Hirschberg J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany, University of Maryland, College Park 20742.

Carotenoids with cyclic end groups are essential components of the 
photosynthetic membrane in all known oxygenic photosynthetic organisms. These 
yellow pigments serve the vital role of protecting against potentially lethal 
photo-oxidative damage. Many of the enzymes and genes of the carotenoid 
biosynthetic pathway in cyanobacteria, algae and plants remain to be isolated or 
identified. We have cloned a cyanobacterial gene encoding lycopene cyclase, an 
enzyme that converts the acyclic carotenoid lycopene to the bicyclic molecule 
beta-carotene. The gene was identified through the use of an experimental 
herbicide, 2-(4-methylphenoxy)triethylamine hydrochloride (MPTA), that prevents 
the cyclization of lycopene in plants and cyanobacteria. Chemically-induced 
mutants of the cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp. PCC7942 were selected for 
resistance to MPTA, and a mutation responsible for this resistance was mapped to 
a genomic DNA region of 200 bp by genetic complementation of the resistance in 
wild-type cells. A 1.5 kb genomic DNA fragment containing this MPTA-resistance 
mutation was expressed in a lycopene-accumulating strain of Escherichia coli. 
The conversion of lycopene to beta-carotene in these cells demonstrated that 
this fragment encodes the enzyme lycopene cyclase. The results indicate that a 
single gene product, designated lcy, catalyzes both of the cyclization reactions 
that are required to produce beta-carotene from lycopene, and prove that this 
enzyme is a target site of the herbicide MPTA. The cloned cyanobacterial lcy 
gene hybridized well with genomic DNA from eukaryotic algae, thus it will enable 
the identification and cloning of homologous genes for lycopene cyclase in algae 
and plants.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-5793(93)80980-9
PMID: 8344419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. FEBS Lett. 1993 Jan 11;315(3):329-34. doi: 10.1016/0014-5793(93)81188-6.

In vitro expression and activity of lycopene cyclase and beta-carotene 
hydroxylase from Erwinia herbicola.

Hundle BS(1), O'Brien DA, Beyer P, Kleinig H, Hearst JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Lawrence Berkeley 
Laboratory, Berkeley 94720.

The cyclisation of lycopene to beta-carotene and the hydroxylation of 
beta-carotene to zeaxanthin are common enzymatic steps in the biosynthesis of 
carotenoids in a wide range of bacteria, fungi, and plants. We have individually 
expressed in E. coli the two genes coding for these enzymatic steps in Erwinia 
herbicola. The cyclase and hydroxylase enzymes have apparent molecular weights 
of 43 kDa and 22 kDa, respectively, as determined by SDS-PAGE. Hydroxylase in 
vitro activity was obtained only in the cytoplasmic fraction. Cyclase also 
demonstrated enzyme activity in a crude cell-free lysate, although to a lesser 
extent.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-5793(93)81188-6
PMID: 8422926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Methods Enzymol. 1993;214:297-311. doi: 10.1016/0076-6879(93)14073-r.

Evolutionary conservation and structural similarities of carotenoid biosynthesis 
gene products from photosynthetic and nonphotosynthetic organisms.

Armstrong GA(1), Hundle BS, Hearst JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Genetics, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), 
Zürich.

DOI: 10.1016/0076-6879(93)14073-r
PMID: 8469144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Plant Mol Biol. 1996 Feb;30(4):807-19. doi: 10.1007/BF00019013.

Cloning and characterization of the cDNA for lycopene beta-cyclase from tomato 
reveals decrease in its expression during fruit ripening.

Pecker I(1), Gabbay R, Cunningham FX Jr, Hirschberg J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel.

The cDNA which encodes lycopene cyclase, CrtL, was cloned from tomato 
(Lycopersicon esculentum cv. VF36) and tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum cv. Samsun NN) 
and functionally expressed in Escherichia coli. This enzyme converts lycopene to 
beta-carotene by catalyzing the formation of two beta-rings at each end of the 
linear carotene. The enzyme interacts with half of the carotenoid molecule and 
requires a double bond at the C-7,8 (or C-7,8') position. Inhibition in E. coli 
indicated that lycopene cyclase is the target site for the inhibitor MPTA, 
2-(4-methylphenoxy)tri-ethylamine hydrochloride. The primary structure of 
lycopene cyclase in higher plants is significantly conserved with the enzyme 
from cyanobacteria but different from that of the non-photosynthetic bacteria 
Erwinia. mRNA of CrtL and Pds, which encodes phytoene desaturase, was measured 
in leaves, flowers and ripening fruits of tomato. In contrast to genes which 
encode enzymes of early steps in the carotenoid biosynthesis pathway, whose 
transcription increases during the 'breaker' stage of fruit ripening, the level 
of CrtL mRNA decreases at this stage. Hence, the accumulation of lycopene in 
tomato fruits is apparently due to a down-regulation of the lycopene cyclase 
gene that occurs at the breaker stage of fruit development. This conclusion 
supports the hypothesis that transcriptional regulation of gene expression is a 
predominant mechanism of regulating carotenogenesis.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00019013
PMID: 8624411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Biochem J. 1996 May 1;315 ( Pt 3)(Pt 3):869-74. doi: 10.1042/bj3150869.

Expression, purification and properties of lycopene cyclase from Erwinia 
uredovora.

Schnurr G(1), Misawa N, Sandmann G.

Author information:
(1)Lehrstuhl für Physiologie und Biochemie der Pflanzen, Universität Konstanz, 
Federal Republic of Germany.

Lycopene cyclase, an enzyme responsible for the formation of cyclic carotenoids 
from acyclic precursors has been purified to homogeneity in an active state. The 
Erwinia uredovora lycopene cyclase gene (crtY) was over-expressed in Escherichia 
coli. From this recombinant strain the enzyme was purified by immuno-affinity 
chromatography and its cyclization activity characterized as a two-step reaction 
in which both sides of the lycopene molecule are cyclized to beta-ionone rings 
with the monocyclic gamma-carotene as an intermediate. Furthermore, neurosporene 
as well as l-hydroxylycopene were cyclized to beta-zeacarotene and 
hydroxy-gamma-carotene respectively. In contrast, neither 1,1'- 
dihydroxylycopene nor the tetra-cis-prolycopene were accepted as substrates. The 
cofactors involved in the reaction were either NADH or NADPH. K(m) values were 
determined for lycopene and NADPH to be 1.8 microM and 2.5 mM respectively.

DOI: 10.1042/bj3150869
PMCID: PMC1217287
PMID: 8645170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Plant Cell. 1996 Sep;8(9):1613-26. doi: 10.1105/tpc.8.9.1613.

Functional analysis of the beta and epsilon lycopene cyclase enzymes of 
Arabidopsis reveals a mechanism for control of cyclic carotenoid formation.

Cunningham FX Jr(1), Pogson B, Sun Z, McDonald KA, DellaPenna D, Gantt E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Biology, University of Maryland, College Park 20742, USA.

Carotenoids with cyclic end groups are essential components of the 
photosynthetic membranes in all plants, algae, and cyanobacteria. These 
lipid-soluble compounds protect against photooxidation, harvest light for 
photosynthesis, and dissipate excess light energy absorbed by the antenna 
pigments. The cyclization of lycopene (psi, psi-carotene) is a key branch point 
in the pathway of carotenoid biosynthesis. Two types of cyclic end groups are 
found in higher plant carotenoids: the beta and epsilon rings. Carotenoids with 
two beta rings are ubiquitous, and those with one beta and one epsilon ring are 
common; however, carotenoids with two epsilon rings are rare. We have identified 
and sequenced cDNAs that encode the enzymes catalyzing the formation of these 
two rings in Arabidopsis. These beta and epsilon cyclases are encoded by 
related, single-copy genes, and both enzymes use the linear, symmetrical 
lycopene as a substrate. However, the epsilon cyclase adds only one ring, 
forming the monocyclic delta-carotene (epsilon, psi-carotene), whereas the beta 
cyclase introduces a ring at both ends of lycopene to form the bicyclic 
beta-carotene (beta, beta-carotene). When combined, the beta and epsilon 
cyclases convert lycopene to alpha-carotene (beta, epsilon-carotene), a 
carotenoid with one beta and one epsilon ring. The inability of the epsilon 
cyclase to catalyze the introduction of a second epsilon ring reveals the 
mechanism by which production and proportions of beta,beta- and beta, 
epsilon-carotenoids may be controlled and adjusted in plants and algae, while 
avoiding the formation of the inappropriate epsilon,epsilon-carotenoids.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.8.9.1613
PMCID: PMC161302
PMID: 8837512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Eur J Biochem. 1996 Oct 1;241(1):291-6. doi:
10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.0291t.x.

The carotenoid 7,8-dihydro-psi end group can be cyclized by the lycopene 
cyclases from the bacterium Erwinia uredovora and the higher plant Capsicum 
annuum.

Takaichi S(1), Sandmann G, Schnurr G, Satomi Y, Suzuki A, Misawa N.

Author information:
(1)Biological Laboratory, Nippon Medical School, Kawasaki, Japan.

The genes for geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase (crtE) and phytoene synthase 
(crtB) from the epiphytic bacterium Erwinia uredovora and the phytoene 
desaturase gene from the photosynthetic bacterium Rhodobacter capsulatus 
(Rc-crtI) were introduced into Escherichia coli, which resulted in the 
accumulation of the acyclic carotenoid, neurosporene. Further introduction of 
the lycopene cyclase gene from E. uredovora (crtY) or the higher plant Capsicum 
annuum (Icy) resulted in the production of a bicyclic carotenoid, 
7,8-dihydro-beta-carotene, via monocyclic beta-zeacarotene. zeta-Carotene was 
also found to be cyclized to bicyclic 7,8,7',8'-tetrahydro-beta-carotene by the 
Erwinia cyclase. These results indicate that both lycopene cyclases can cyclize 
a 7,8-dihydro-psi end group to a 7,8-dihydro-beta end group, in addition to the 
usual cyclization of the psi end group to the beta end group. Furthermore, 
beta-carotene hydroxylase from Erwinia (CrtZ) was able to add a hydroxyl group 
to the 7,8-dihydro-beta end group and the beta end group.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.0291t.x
PMID: 8898919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mol Gen Genet. 1996 Oct 28;252(6):658-66. doi: 10.1007/BF02173971.

Activation and analysis of cryptic crt genes for carotenoid biosynthesis from 
Streptomyces griseus.

Schumann G(1), Nürnberger H, Sandmann G, Krügel H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Hans Knöll Institute for Natural 
Product Research, Germany.

Genes encoding enzymes with sequence similarity to carotenoid biosynthetic 
enzymes of other organisms were cloned from Streptomyces griseus JA3933 and 
transformed into the colourless (non-daunorubicin producing) mutant Streptomyces 
griseus IMET JA3933/956/2. Cells harbouring these genes showed an orange-red 
pigmentation, caused by the strongly hydrophobic, membrane-bound lycopene. The 
cloned fragment (9 kb) contained seven genes, four transcribed in one direction 
(crtEIBV) and three (crtYTU) transcribed convergently to them. Three of these 
genes encode polypeptides that resemble geranylgeranyl-pyrophosphate (GGPP) 
synthases (CrtE), phytoene synthases (PS) (CrtB) and phytoene dehydrogenases 
(PDH) (CrtI), respectively, of various bacteria. These enzymes are sufficient 
for the formation of lycopene. crtE alone was sufficient to induce zeaxanthin 
formation in an Escherichia coli clone containing the crt gene cluster from 
Erwinia herbicola deleted for crtE. The combination of crtE and crtB led to 
formation of phytoene in S. griseus. The putative crtEp promoter region was 
cloned and mapped by primer extension analysis. In a gel retardation experiment, 
this fragment was specifically shifted by an unknown protein. CrtY shows 
similarity to lycopene cyclases that convert lycopene into beta-carotene, CrtT 
resembles various methyltransferases and CrtU a dehydrogenase. We conclude that 
these genes are functionally intact, but not expressed (cryptic) in the 
wild-type S. griseus strain.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02173971
PMID: 8917308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Biochem J. 1996 Nov 1;319 ( Pt 3)(Pt 3):1005-6. doi: 10.1042/bj3191005.

The tentative (alpha/beta)8-barrel in the pathway of beta-carotene biosynthesis: 
lycopene cyclase has an amino acid sequence similar to that of xylose isomerase.

Janecek S.

DOI: 10.1042/bj3191005
PMCID: PMC1217888
PMID: 8921012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Gene. 1997 Jan 31;185(1):35-41. doi: 10.1016/s0378-1119(96)00624-5.

Isolation and characterization of the carotenoid biosynthesis genes of 
Flavobacterium sp. strain R1534.

Pasamontes L(1), Hug D, Tessier M, Hohmann HP, Schierle J, van Loon AP.

Author information:
(1)F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., Vitamins and Fine Chemicals Division, Basel, 
Switzerland. luis.pasamontes@roche.com

The Gram-negative bacterium Flavobacterium sp. strain R1534 is a natural 
producer of zeaxanthin. A 14 kb genomic DNA fragment of this organism has been 
cloned and a 5.1 kb piece containing the carotenoid biosynthesis genes 
sequenced. The carotenoid biosynthesis cluster consists of five genes arranged 
in at least two operons. The five genes are necessary and sufficient for the 
synthesis of zeaxanthin. The encoded proteins have significant homology to the 
crtE, crtB, crtY, crtI and crtZ gene products of other carotenogenic organisms. 
Biochemical assignment of the individual gene products was done by HPLC analysis 
of the carotenoid accumulation in Escherichia coli host strains transformed with 
plasmids carrying deletions of the Flavobacterium sp. strain R1534 carotenoid 
biosynthesis cluster.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1119(96)00624-5
PMID: 9034310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Gene. 1997 Apr 21;189(2):169-74. doi: 10.1016/s0378-1119(96)00788-3.

Cloning, sequencing and expressing the carotenoid biosynthesis genes, lycopene 
cyclase and phytoene desaturase, from the aerobic photosynthetic bacterium 
Erythrobacter longus sp. strain Och101 in Escherichia coli.

Matsumura H(1), Takeyama H, Kusakabe E, Burgess JG, Matsunaga T.

Author information:
(1)Asahi Chemical Industry Co., Ltd., Fuji-city, Shizuoka, Japan.

Two genes which encode the enzymes lycopene cyclase and phytoene desaturase in 
the aerobic photosynthetic bacterium Erythrobacter longus sp. strain Och101 have 
been cloned and sequenced. The gene for lycopene cyclase, designated crtY, was 
expressed in a strain of Escherichia coli which contained the crtE, B, I and Z 
genes encoding geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthase, phytoene synthase, 
phytoene desaturase, and beta-carotene hydroxylase, respectively. As a result, 
zeaxanthin production was observed in E. coli transformants. In addition, 
expression of the E. longus gene crtI for phytoene desaturase in E. coli 
containing crtE and B resulted in the accumulation of lycopene in transformants. 
Zeaxanthin and lycopene were also determined by mass spectrum. Nucleotide 
sequence similarities between E. longus crtY gene and other microbial lycopene 
cyclase genes are 40.2% (Erwinia herbicola), 37.4% (Erwinia uredovora) and 22.9% 
(Synechococcus sp.), and those between phytoene desaturase genes are 50.3% (E. 
herbicola), 54.7% (E. uredovora) and 39.6% (Rhodobacter capsulatus).

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1119(96)00788-3
PMID: 9168123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Eur J Biochem. 1997 Aug 1;247(3):942-50. doi:
10.1111/j.1432-1033.1997.00942.x.

Chloroplast import of four carotenoid biosynthetic enzymes in vitro reveals 
differential fates prior to membrane binding and oligomeric assembly.

Bonk M(1), Hoffmann B, Von Lintig J, Schledz M, Al-Babili S, Hobeika E, Kleinig 
H, Beyer P.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Biologie II, Zellbiologie, Universität Freiburg, Germany.

The precursor proteins of the carotenogenic enzymes geranylgeranyl diphosphate 
synthase, phytoene synthase, phytoene desaturase and lycopene cyclase were 
imported into isolated pea chloroplasts. Geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase 
remained soluble in the stroma in a free form and phytoene synthase associated 
to thylakoid membranes upon import, both as expected. Surprisingly, phytoene 
desaturase and lycopene cyclase, which strongly depend on membrane association 
for enzymatic activity, also remained soluble in the chloroplast stroma. The 
soluble forms of these enzymes were, however, still competent for 
membrane-association, e.g. with protein-free liposomal membranes. Indeed the 
soluble forms of phytoene synthase, phytoene desaturase and lycopene cyclase 
occurred as ATP- and cold-sensitive high-molecular-mass complexes. 
Gel-filtration experiments and blue native-PAGE plus autoradiography and western 
blot analysis indicated a participation of the chloroplast 60-kDa chaperonin 
(Cpn60) in the soluble high-molecular-mass complexes of imported carotenogenic 
enzymes. Finally, it was inferred that a membrane-bound regulatory factor plays 
a decisive role in membrane-binding.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1997.00942.x
PMID: 9288918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1997 Oct 1;346(1):53-64. doi: 10.1006/abbi.1997.0278.

Molecular analysis of carotenoid cyclase inhibition.

Bouvier F(1), d'Harlingue A, Camara B.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Biologie Moléculaire des Plantes du Centre National de la 
Recherche Scientifique, Université Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France.

Later steps of carotenoid biosynthesis catalyzed by cyclase enzymes involve the 
formation of alpha, beta, and kappa-rings. Examination of the primary structure 
of lycopene beta-cyclase revealed 55% identity with that of antheraxanthin 
kappa-cyclase. Recombinant lycopene beta-cyclase afforded only beta-carotene, 
while recombinant antheraxanthin kappa-cyclase catalyzed the formation of 
beta-carotene from lycopene as well as the conversion of antheraxanthin into the 
kappa-carotenoid capsanthin. Since the formation of beta- and kappa-rings 
involves a transient carotenoid carbocation, this suggests that both cyclases 
initiate and/or neutralize the incipient carbocation by similar mechanisms. 
Several amine derivatives protonated at physiological pH were used to examine 
the molecular basis of this phenomenon. The beta-and kappa-cyclases displayed 
similar inhibition patterns. Affinity or photoaffinity labeling using 
p-dimethylamino-benzenediazonium fluoroborate, N,N-dimethyl-2-phenylaziridinium, 
and nicotine irreversibly inactivated both cyclase enzymes. Photoaffinity 
labeling using [3H]nicotine followed by radiosequence analysis and site-directed 
mutagenesis revealed the existence of two cyclase domains characterized by the 
presence of reactive aromatic and carboxylic amino acid residues. We propose 
that these residues represent the "negative point charges" involved in the 
coordination of the incipient carotenoid carbocations.

DOI: 10.1006/abbi.1997.0278
PMID: 9328284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Int J Biol Macromol. 1997 Oct;21(3):277-80. doi:
10.1016/s0141-8130(97)00067-6.

Sequence similarity between xylose isomerase and replicase: another TIM-barrel 
in the replicase structure?

Janecek S(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovak 
Republic. sjanecek@ue.savba.sk

The BLAST search using the strand beta 2 (46_GAHGVTFHDDDLIP) of the 
(alpha/beta)8-barrel of xylose isomerase from Streptomyces olivochromogenes 
resulted in retrieving the sequentially similar segment of replicase from garlic 
latent virus (692_GGHGIGFHRDD). The detailed analysis of the entire amino acid 
sequences of both xylose isomerase and replicase suggested that the polypeptide 
segment 644-1046 of replicase (the entire length of this enzyme is 1924 
residues) could share the structure of xylose isomerase (20.7% identity using 
the entire sequence of xylose isomerase). The relatedness of replicase and 
xylose isomerase is supported by the fact that the sequence similarity can be 
observed along the whole sequence of xylose isomerase (386 amino acid residues). 
The sequence of replicase exhibits moreover the similarity with that of lycopene 
cyclase, an enzyme implicated in the beta-carotene biosynthesis, that was 
previously found to share similarity with xylose isomerase. Thus the relevant 
segment of replicase is predicted to adopt an (alpha/beta)8-barrel topology 
similar to that of xylose isomerase.

DOI: 10.1016/s0141-8130(97)00067-6
PMID: 9352374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Sep 15;95(19):11482-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.95.19.11482.

Differential expression of two isopentenyl pyrophosphate isomerases and enhanced 
carotenoid accumulation in a unicellular chlorophyte.

Sun Z(1), Cunningham FX Jr, Gantt E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics, University of Maryland, 
College Park, MD 20742, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998 Nov 24;95(24):14585.

The enzyme isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP) isomerase catalyzes the reversible 
isomerization of IPP to produce dimethylallyl pyrophosphate, the initial 
substrate leading to the biosynthesis of carotenoids and many other long-chain 
isoprenoids. Expression of IPP isomerase, and of two enzymes specific to the 
carotenoid pathway (lycopene beta-cyclase and beta-carotene-C-4-oxygenase), was 
followed in the green unicellular alga Haematococcus pluvialis after exposure to 
high illumination. This alga uniquely accumulates carotenoids in the cytoplasm 
and in late developmental stages turns deep-red in color because of accumulation 
of ketocarotenoids in the cytosol. The carotenoid/chlorophyll ratio increased 
3-fold in wild type and 6-fold in a precocious carotenoid-accumulating mutant 
(Car-3) within 24 h after increasing the illumination from 20 to 150 micromol 
photon m-2.s-1. Two cDNAs encoding IPP isomerase in Haematococcus, ipiHp1 and 
ipiHp2, were identified. Although otherwise highly similar (95% identity 
overall), the predicted sequence of ipiHp1 contained a 12-aa region not found in 
that of ipiHp2. This was reflected by a size difference between two polypeptides 
of 34 and 32.5 kDa, both of which reacted with an antibody to the product of 
ipiHp1. We suggest that the 32.5-kDa form is involved with the carotenoid 
accumulation in the cytoplasm, since the 32.5-kDa polypeptide was preferentially 
up-regulated by high light preceding the carotenoid increase and only this form 
was detected in red cysts.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.19.11482
PMCID: PMC21669
PMID: 9736763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Plant J. 1999 Feb;17(4):341-51. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.1999.00381.x.

Regulation of carotenoid biosynthesis during tomato fruit development: 
expression of the gene for lycopene epsilon-cyclase is down-regulated during 
ripening and is elevated in the mutant Delta.

Ronen G(1), Cohen M, Zamir D, Hirschberg J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Life Sciences Institute, Jerusalem, Israel.

The red colour of tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) fruits is provided by the 
carotenoid pigment lycopene whose concentration increases dramatically during 
the ripening process. A single dominant gene, Del, in the tomato mutant Delta 
changes the fruit colour to orange as a result of accumulation of delta-carotene 
at the expense of lycopene. The cDNA for lycopene epsilon-cyclase (CrtL-e), 
which converts lycopene to delta-carotene, was cloned from tomato. The primary 
structure of CRTL-E is 71% identical to the homologous polypeptide from 
Arabidopsis and 36% identical to the tomato lycopene beta-cyclase, CRTL-B. The 
CrtL-e gene was mapped to a single locus on chromosome 12 of the tomato linkage 
map. This locus co-segregated with the Del gene. In the wild-type tomato, the 
transcript level of CrtL-e decreases at the 'breaker' stage of ripening to a 
non-detectable level in the ripe fruit. In contrast, it increases approximately 
30-fold during fruit ripening in the Delta plants. The Delta mutation does not 
affect carotenoid composition nor the mRNA level of CrtL-e in leaves and 
flowers. These results strongly suggest that the mutation Del is an allele of 
the gene for epsilon-cyclase. Together with previous data, our results indicate 
that the primary mechanism that controls lycopene accumulation in tomato fruits 
is based on the differential regulation of expression of carotenoid biosynthesis 
genes. During fruit development, the mRNA levels for the lycopene-producing 
enzymes phytoene synthase (PSY) and phytoene desaturase (PDS) increase, while 
the mRNA levels of the genes for the lycopene beta- and epsilon-cyclases, which 
convert lycopene to either beta- or delta-carotene, respectively, decline and 
completely disappear.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.1999.00381.x
PMID: 10205893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Gen Genet. 1999 Oct;262(3):453-61. doi: 10.1007/s004380051105.

Isolation and functional characterisation of a novel type of carotenoid 
biosynthetic gene from Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous.

Verdoes JC(1), Krubasik KP, Sandmann G, van Ooyen AJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Technology and Nutritional Sciences, Wageningen 
University, The Netherlands. Jan.Verdoes@imb.ftns.wau.nl

The red heterobasidiomycetous yeast Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous (perfect state 
of Phaffia rhodozyma) contains a novel type of carotenoid biosynthetic enzyme. 
Its structural gene, designated crtYB, was isolated by functional 
complementation in a genetically modified, carotenogenic Escherichia coli 
strain. Expression studies in different carotenogenic E. coli strains 
demonstrated that the crt YB gene encodes a bifunctional protein involved both 
in synthesis of phytoene from geranylgeranyl diphosphate and in cyclisation of 
lycopene to beta-carotene. By sequence comparison with other phytoene synthases 
and complementation studies in E. coli with various deletion derivatives of the 
crtYB gene, the regions responsible for phytoene synthesis and lycopene 
cyclisation were localised within the protein.

DOI: 10.1007/s004380051105
PMID: 10589832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Science. 2000 Jan 14;287(5451):303-5. doi: 10.1126/science.287.5451.303.

Engineering the provitamin A (beta-carotene) biosynthetic pathway into 
(carotenoid-free) rice endosperm.

Ye X(1), Al-Babili S, Klöti A, Zhang J, Lucca P, Beyer P, Potrykus I.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Plant Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, CH-8092 
Zurich, Switzerland. University of Freiburg, Center for Applied Biosciences, 
D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

Comment in
    Science. 2000 Jan 14;287(5451):241-3.
    Science. 2000 Jun 16;288(5473):1966-7.

Rice (Oryza sativa), a major staple food, is usually milled to remove the 
oil-rich aleurone layer that turns rancid upon storage, especially in tropical 
areas. The remaining edible part of rice grains, the endosperm, lacks several 
essential nutrients, such as provitamin A. Thus, predominant rice consumption 
promotes vitamin A deficiency, a serious public health problem in at least 26 
countries, including highly populated areas of Asia, Africa, and Latin America. 
Recombinant DNA technology was used to improve its nutritional value in this 
respect. A combination of transgenes enabled biosynthesis of provitamin A in the 
endosperm.

DOI: 10.1126/science.287.5451.303
PMID: 10634784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Science. 2000 Jan 14;287(5451):241-3. doi: 10.1126/science.287.5451.241.

Perspectives: plant biology. The green revolution strikes gold.

Guerinot ML(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755, USA. 
M.L.Guerinot@Dartmouth.edu

Comment in
    Science. 2000 Jun 16;288(5473):1966-7.

Comment on
    Science. 2000 Jan 14;287(5451):303-5.

DOI: 10.1126/science.287.5451.241
PMID: 10660423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mol Gen Genet. 2000 Apr;263(3):423-32. doi: 10.1007/s004380051186.

A carotenogenic gene cluster from Brevibacterium linens with novel lycopene 
cyclase genes involved in the synthesis of aromatic carotenoids.

Krubasik P(1), Sandmann G.

Author information:
(1)Biosynthesis Group, Botanical Institute, J.W. Goethe Universität, 
Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

The carotenogenic (crt) gene cluster from Brevibacterium linens, a member of the 
commercially important group of coryneform bacteria, was cloned and identified. 
An expression library of B. linens genes was constructed and a fragment of the 
crt cluster was obtained by functional complementation of a colourless B. flavum 
mutant, screening transformed cells for production of a yellow pigment. 
Subsequent screening of a cosmid library resulted in the cloning of the whole 
crt cluster from B. linens. All genes necessary for the synthesis of the 
aromatic carotenoid isorenieratene were identified on the basis of sequence 
homologies. In addition a novel type of lycopene cyclase was identified by 
complementation of a lycopene-accumulating B. flavum mutant. Two genes, named 
crt Yc and crt Yd, which code for polypeptides of 125 and 107 amino acids, 
respectively, are necessary to convert lycopene to beta-carotene. The amino acid 
sequences of these polypeptides show no similarity to any of the known lycopene 
cyclases. This is the first example of a carotenoid biosynthetic conversion in 
which two different gene products are involved, probably forming a heterodimer.

DOI: 10.1007/s004380051186
PMID: 10821176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Bacteriol. 2000 Jul;182(13):3850-3. doi: 10.1128/JB.182.13.3850-3853.2000.

Isolation and characterization of canthaxanthin biosynthesis genes from the 
photosynthetic bacterium Bradyrhizobium sp. strain ORS278.

Hannibal L(1), Lorquin J, D'Ortoli NA, Garcia N, Chaintreuil C, Masson-Boivin C, 
Dreyfus B, Giraud E.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire des Symbioses Tropicales et Méditerranéennes, IRD, CIRAD, AGRO-M, 
INRA, 34398 Montpellier, France.

A carotenoid biosynthesis gene cluster involved in canthaxanthin production was 
isolated from the photosynthetic Bradyrhizobium sp. strain ORS278. This cluster 
includes five genes identified as crtE, crtY, crtI, crtB, and crtW that are 
organized in at least two operons. The functional assignment of each open 
reading frame was confirmed by complementation studies.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.182.13.3850-3853.2000
PMCID: PMC94561
PMID: 10851005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Nat Biotechnol. 2000 Jul;18(7):750-3. doi: 10.1038/77319.

Molecular breeding of carotenoid biosynthetic pathways.

Schmidt-Dannert C(1), Umeno D, Arnold FH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Biophysics, University of 
Minnesota, St. Paul, MN 55108, USA.

The burgeoning demand for complex, biologically active molecules for medicine, 
materials science, consumer products, and agrochemicals is driving efforts to 
engineer new biosynthetic pathways into microorganisms and plants. We have 
applied principles of breeding, including mixing genes and modifying catalytic 
functions by in vitro evolution, to create new metabolic pathways for 
biosynthesis of natural products in Escherichia coli. We expressed shuffled 
phytoene desaturases in the context of a carotenoid biosynthetic pathway 
assembled from different bacterial species and screened the resulting library 
for novel carotenoids. One desaturase chimera efficiently introduced six rather 
than four double bonds into phytoene, to favor production of the fully 
conjugated carotenoid, 3, 4,3',4'-tetradehydrolycopene. This new pathway was 
extended with a second library of shuffled lycopene cyclases to produce a 
variety of colored products. One of the new pathways generates the cyclic 
carotenoid torulene, for the first time, in E. coli. This combined approach of 
rational pathway assembly and molecular breeding may allow the discovery and 
production, in simple laboratory organisms, of new compounds that are 
essentially inaccessible from natural sources or by synthetic chemistry.

DOI: 10.1038/77319
PMID: 10888843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Eur J Biochem. 2000 Sep;267(17):5509-19. doi:
10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01612.x.

A bifunctional enzyme with lycopene cyclase and phytoene synthase activities is 
encoded by the carRP gene of Mucor circinelloides.

Velayos A(1), Eslava AP, Iturriaga EA.

Author information:
(1)Area de Genética, Departamento de Microbiología y Genética, Universidad de 
Salamanca, Spain.

Using functional analyses in Escherichia coli and Mucor circinelloides, it has 
been shown that a single M. circinelloides gene (carRP) codes for a protein with 
two different enzymatic activities, lycopene cyclase and phytoene synthase, 
which are encoded by independent genes in organisms other than fungi. This gene 
was identified using complementation tests among different classes of carotenoid 
mutants of M. circinelloides. The carRP gene product contains two domains: the R 
domain is located at the N-terminus and determines lycopene cyclase activity; 
the P domain is located at the C-terminus and displays phytoene synthase 
activity. The R domain is functional even in the absence of the P domain, while 
the latter needs the proper R domain conformation to carry out its function. The 
carRP gene is closely linked to the phytoene dehydrogenase (carB) gene, and the 
promoter regions of both genes are located within only 446 bp. Northern analyses 
show a co-ordinated regulation of the expression of both genes by blue light. 
Several motifs found in this promoter region suggest a bi-directional mode of 
transcription control.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01612.x
PMID: 10951210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Sep 26;97(20):11102-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.190177497.

An alternative pathway to beta -carotene formation in plant chromoplasts 
discovered by map-based cloning of beta and old-gold color mutations in tomato.

Ronen G(1), Carmel-Goren L, Zamir D, Hirschberg J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, The Life Sciences Institute, and Faculty of 
Agriculture, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 91904 Israel.

Carotenoid pigments in plants fulfill indispensable functions in photosynthesis. 
Carotenoids that accumulate as secondary metabolites in chromoplasts provide 
distinct coloration to flowers and fruits. In this work we investigated the 
genetic mechanisms that regulate accumulation of carotenoids as secondary 
metabolites during ripening of tomato fruits. We analyzed two mutations that 
affect fruit pigmentation in tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum): Beta (B), a 
single dominant gene that increases beta-carotene in the fruit, and old-gold 
(og), a recessive mutation that abolishes beta-carotene and increases lycopene. 
Using a map-based cloning approach we cloned the genes B and og. Molecular 
analysis revealed that B encodes a novel type of lycopene beta-cyclase, an 
enzyme that converts lycopene to beta-carotene. The amino acid sequence of B is 
similar to capsanthin-capsorubin synthase, an enzyme that produces red 
xanthophylls in fruits of pepper (Capsicum annum). Our results prove that 
beta-carotene is synthesized de novo during tomato fruit development by the B 
lycopene cyclase. In wild-type tomatoes B is expressed at low levels during the 
breaker stage of ripening, whereas in the Beta mutant its transcription is 
dramatically increased. Null mutations in the gene B are responsible for the 
phenotype in og, indicating that og is an allele of B. These results confirm 
that developmentally regulated transcription is the major mechanism that governs 
lycopene accumulation in ripening fruits. The cloned B genes can be used in 
various genetic manipulations toward altering pigmentation and enhancing 
nutritional value of plant foods.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.190177497
PMCID: PMC27155
PMID: 10995464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Eur J Biochem. 2000 Nov;267(21):6346-52. doi:
10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01722.x.

Identification of neoxanthin synthase as a carotenoid cyclase paralog.

Bouvier F(1), D'harlingue A, Backhaus RA, Kumagai MH, Camara B.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Biologie Moléculaire des Plantes du Centre National de la 
Recherche Scientifique and Université Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France.

Neoxanthin, a precursor of the plant hormone abscisic acid, is an allenic 
xanthophyll recognized as the last product of carotenoid synthesis in green 
plants. A cDNA for neoxanthin synthase (NSY) was isolated from tomato using a 
molecular approach based on the mechanistic and structural similarities of NSY 
to two other closely related carotenogenic enzymes, lycopene cyclase (LCY) and 
capsanthin-capsorubin synthase (CCS). The identified tomato NSY cDNA (T.NSY) 
encodes a 56-kDa plastid-targeted protein that when expressed in Escherichia 
coli, catalyzes the conversion of violaxanthin to neoxanthin. In tobacco leaves 
that transiently express T.NSY, an increase in neoxanthin content with a 
concomitant decrease in violaxanthin is observed. NSY is structurally similar to 
LCY and CCS. However, in Cyanobacteria, the generally accepted progenitor of 
plastids, both CCS and NSY are absent while LCY is present. LCY catalyzes a 
simplified version of the reaction catalyzed by NSY and CCS suggesting that 
these two enzymes were remodeled from LCY during higher plant evolution to 
create new forms of oxidized carotenoids.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01722.x
PMID: 11029576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Plant J. 2000 Nov;24(3):413-9. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.2000.00880.x.

Metabolic engineering of beta-carotene and lycopene content in tomato fruit.

Rosati C(1), Aquilani R, Dharmapuri S, Pallara P, Marusic C, Tavazza R, Bouvier 
F, Camara B, Giuliano G.

Author information:
(1)Ente per le Nuove tecnologie, l'Energia e l'Ambiente (ENEA), Casaccia Res. 
Ctr., Biotechnology and Agriculture Division, Via Anguillarese 301, 00060 S. 
Maria di Galeria (Roma), Italy.

Ripe tomato fruits accumulate large amounts of the red linear carotene, lycopene 
(a dietary antioxidant) and small amounts of its orange cyclisation product, 
beta-carotene (pro-vitamin A). Lycopene is transformed into beta-carotene by the 
action of lycopene beta-cyclase (beta-Lcy). We introduced, via 
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation, DNA constructs aimed at up-regulating (OE 
construct) or down-regulating (AS construct) the expression of the beta-Lcy gene 
in a fruit-specific fashion. Three transformants containing the OE construct 
show a significant increase in fruit beta-carotene content. The fruits from 
these plants display different colour phenotypes, from orange to orange-red, 
depending on the lycopene/beta-carotene ratio. Fruits from AS transformants show 
up to 50% inhibition of beta-Lcy expression, accompanied by a slight increase in 
lycopene content. Leaf carotenoid composition is unaltered in all transformants. 
In most transformants, an increase in total carotenoid content is observed with 
respect to the parental line. This increase occurs in the absence of major 
variations in the expression of endogenous carotenoid genes.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.2000.00880.x
PMID: 11069713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Biochem Soc Trans. 2000 Dec;28(6):806-10.

Molecular evolution of lycopene cyclases involved in the formation of 
carotenoids with ionone end groups.

Krubasik P(1), Sandmann G.

Author information:
(1)Biosynthesis Group, Botanical Institute, J.W. Goethe Universität, P.O. Box 
111930, D-60054 Frankfurt, Germany.

A survey is given of the lycopene cyclase genes present in bacteria, fungi and 
plants where two completely unrelated types exist. One is the classical 
monomeric bacterial beta-cyclase gene, crtY, which may be an ancestor of crtL, 
the gene for a beta-cyclase in cyanobacteria. From crtL a line of evolution can 
be drawn to plant beta- and epsilon-cyclase genes and to the gene of 
capsanthin/capsorubin synthase. In Gram-positive bacteria two genes crtYc and 
crtYd are present. They encode two proteins which have to interact as a 
heterodimer for lycopene beta-cyclization. From this type of lycopene cyclase 
gene the fungal lycopene cyclase/phytoene synthase fusion gene evolved.

PMID: 11171215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Feb 13;98(4):1687-92. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.98.4.1687. Epub 2001 Feb 6.

A single gene for lycopene cyclase, phytoene synthase, and regulation of 
carotene biosynthesis in Phycomyces.

Arrach N(1), Fernández-Martín R, Cerdá-Olmedo E, Avalos J.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Genética, Universidad de Sevilla, 41012 Sevilla, Spain.

Previous complementation and mapping of mutations that change the usual yellow 
color of the Zygomycete Phycomyces blakesleeanus to white or red led to the 
definition of two structural genes for carotene biosynthesis. We have cloned one 
of these genes, carRA, by taking advantage of its close linkage to the other, 
carB, responsible for phytoene dehydrogenase. The sequences of the wild type and 
six mutants have been established, compared with sequences in other organisms, 
and correlated with the mutant phenotypes. The carRA and carB coding sequences 
are separated by 1,381 untranslated nucleotides and are divergently transcribed. 
Gene carRA contains separate domains for two enzymes, lycopene cyclase and 
phytoene synthase, and regulates the overall activity of the pathway and its 
response to physical and chemical stimuli from the environment. The lycopene 
cyclase domain of carRA derived from a duplication of a gene from a common 
ancestor of fungi and Brevibacterium linens; the phytoene synthase domain is 
similar to the phytoene and squalene synthases of many organisms; but the 
regulatory functions appear to be specific to Phycomyces.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.98.4.1687
PMCID: PMC29318
PMID: 11172012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol. 2001 Jan;3(1):95-101.

A sigmaB-like factor responsible for carotenoid biosynthesis in Streptomyces 
griseus.

Lee HS(1), Ohnishi Y, Horinouchi S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Agriculture and Life 
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Japan.

Self-cloning experiments with a high-copy-number plasmid and Streptomyces 
griseus IFO13350 led to the cloning of a 11-kb DNA fragment that conferred 
yellow pigment production on the host. The cloned fragment contained a gene 
cluster for carotenoid biosynthesis, in which two polycistrons, crtE (encoding 
geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthase)-crtI (phytoene dehydrogenase)-crtB 
(phytoene synthase)-crtV (functionally unknown methyltransferase-like protein) 
and crtY (lycopene cyclase)-crtT (functionally unknown methyltransferase-like 
protein)-crtU (beta-carotene dehydrogenase), were present in a convergent way. 
Since strain IFO13350 produced no detectable amount of carotenoids, an increase 
in the copy number of the crt gene cluster led to production of carotenoids at a 
detectable level. Overexpression of the stress-responsive sigmaB-like protein 
CrtS from Streptomyces setonii also activated the cryptic crt genes in S. 
griseus and conferred pigmentation. A CrtS homologue (sigmaCrtS) in S. griseus, 
which was predicted by a computer-aided homology search, caused carotenogenesis 
to the same extent as CrtS of S. setonii, indicating that the two sigmaB-like 
proteins were functionally the same. Yellow pigment production by S. griseus 
containing crtS under the control of a strong promoter on a high-copy-number 
plasmid resulted from activation of transcription of the crt genes, because 
overexpression of sigmaCrtS in S. griseus led to transcriptional activation of 
the promoters in front of crtE and crtY. S1 nuclease mapping showed that crtS 
itself was transcribed at a low level under the laboratory conditions, which may 
account for undetectable production of carotenoids. The crt genes were suggested 
to locate very near one end of the linear chromosome, since they were completely 
deleted in mutant HH1 having large deletions at both ends. The gene organization 
of crt in S. griseus is similar to that in S. coelicolor A3(2) where the whole 
crt gene set is near one end of the chromosome.

PMID: 11200234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Feb 27;98(5):2905-10. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.051618398. Epub 2001 Feb 20.

One ring or two? Determination of ring number in carotenoids by lycopene 
epsilon-cyclases.

Cunningham FX Jr(1), Gantt E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics, Microbiology Building, 
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA. fc18@umail.umd.edu

Carotenoids in the photosynthetic membranes of plants typically contain two 
beta-rings (e.g., beta-carotene and zeaxanthin) or one epsilon- and one 
beta-ring (e.g., lutein). Carotenoids with two epsilon-rings are uncommon. We 
reported earlier that the Arabidopsis thaliana lycopene epsilon-cyclase (LCYe) 
adds one epsilon-ring to the symmetrical linear substrate lycopene, whereas the 
structurally related lycopene beta-cyclase (LCYb) adds two beta-rings. Here we 
describe a cDNA encoding LCYe in romaine lettuce (Lactuca sativa var. romaine), 
one of the few plant species known to accumulate substantial quantities of a 
carotenoid with two epsilon-rings: lactucaxanthin. The product of the lettuce 
cDNA, similar in sequence to the Arabidopsis LCYe (77% amino acid identity), 
efficiently converted lycopene into the bicyclic epsilon-carotene in a 
heterologous Escherichia coli system. Regions of the lettuce and Arabidopsis 
epsilon-cyclases involved in the determination of ring number were mapped by 
analysis of chimeric epsilon-cyclases constructed by using an inverse PCR 
approach. A single amino acid was found to act as a molecular switch: lettuce 
LCYe mutant H457L added only one epsilon-ring to lycopene, whereas the 
complementary Arabidopsis LCYe mutant, L448H, added two epsilon-rings. An R 
residue in this position also yields a bi-epsilon-cyclase for both the lettuce 
and Arabidopsis enzymes. Construction and analysis of chimera of related enzymes 
with differing catalytic activities provide an informative approach that may be 
of particular utility for studying membrane-associated enzymes that cannot 
easily be crystallized or modeled to existing crystal structures.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.051618398
PMCID: PMC30238
PMID: 11226339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Curr Opin Plant Biol. 2001 Jun;4(3):210-8. doi:
10.1016/s1369-5266(00)00163-1.

Carotenoid biosynthesis in flowering plants.

Hirschberg J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, The Alexander Silberman Life Science Institute, The 
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 91904, Jerusalem, Israel. 
Joseph.Hirschberg@huji.ac.il

The general scheme of carotenoid biosynthesis has been known for more than three 
decades. However, molecular description of the pathway in plants began only in 
the 1990s after the genes for the carotenogenic enzymes were cloned. Recent data 
on the biochemistry of carotenogenesis and its regulation in vivo present the 
possibility of genetically manipulating this pathway in crop plants.

DOI: 10.1016/s1369-5266(00)00163-1
PMID: 11312131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Novartis Found Symp. 2001;236:219-28; discussion 228-32. doi: 
10.1002/9780470515778.ch16.

Biosynthesis of beta-carotene (provitamin A) in rice endosperm achieved by 
genetic engineering.

al-Babili S(1), Ye X, Lucca P, Potrykus I, Beyer P.

Author information:
(1)University of Freiburg, Center for Applied Biosciences, D-79104 Freiburg, 
Germany.

To obtain a functioning provitamin A (beta-carotene) biosynthetic pathway in 
rice endosperm, we introduced in a single, combined transformation effort the 
cDNAs coding for (1) phytoene synthase (psy) and (2) lycopene beta-cyclase 
(beta-lcy; both from Narcissus pseudonarcissus and both under control of the 
endosperm-specific glutelin promoter), with (3) a bacterial phytoene desaturase 
(crtI, from Erwinia uredovora under constitutive 35S promoter control). This 
combination covers the requirements for beta-carotene synthesis, and yellow, 
beta-carotene-bearing rice endosperm was obtained in the T0 generation. However, 
further experiments revealed that the presence of beta-lcy was not necessary, 
since psy and crtI alone were able to drive beta-carotene synthesis as well as 
the formation of further downstream xanthophylls. This finding could be 
explained if these downstream enzymes are either constitutively expressed in 
rice endosperm or are induced by the transformation, e.g. by products derived 
therefrom. Based on results in N. pseudonarcissus as a model system, a likely 
hypothesis can be developed that trans lycopene or a trans lycopene derivative 
acts as an inductor in a kind of feedback mechanism stimulating endogenous 
carotenogenic genes.

DOI: 10.1002/9780470515778.ch16
PMID: 11387982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Eur J Biochem. 2001 Jul;268(13):3702-8. doi:
10.1046/j.1432-1327.2001.02275.x.

Expression and functional analysis of a gene cluster involved in the synthesis 
of decaprenoxanthin reveals the mechanisms for C50 carotenoid formation.

Krubasik P(1), Kobayashi M, Sandmann G.

Author information:
(1)Botanisches Institut, Goethe Universität, Frankfurt, Germany.

Corynebacterium glutamicum accumulates the C50 carotenoid decaprenoxanthin. 
Rescued DNA from transposon color mutants of this Gram-positive bacterium was 
used to clone the carotenoid biosynthetic gene cluster. By sequence comparison 
and functional complementation, the genes involved in the synthesis of 
carotenoids with 50 carbon atoms were identified. The genes crtE, encoding a 
geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthase, crtB, encoding a phytoene synthase, and 
crtI, encoding a phytoene desaturase, are responsible for the formation of 
lycopene. The products of three novel genes, crtYe and crtYf, with sequence 
similarities to heterodimeric lycopene cyclase crtYc and crtYd, together with 
crtEb which exhibits a prenyl transferase motif, were involved in the conversion 
of C40 acyclic lycopene to cyclic C50 carotenoids. Using functional 
complementation in Escherichia coli, it could be shown that the elongation of 
lycopene to the acyclic C50 carotenoid flavuxanthin by the addition of C5 
isoprenoid units at positions C-2 and C-2' is catalyzed by the crtEb gene 
product. Subsequently, the gene products of crtYe and crtYf in a concerted 
action convert the acyclic flavuxanthin into the cyclic C50 carotene, 
decaprenoxanthin, forming two epsilon-ionone groups. The mechanisms, involving 
two individual steps for the formation of cyclic C50 carotenoids from lycopene, 
are proposed on the basis of these results.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.2001.02275.x
PMID: 11432736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Pest Manag Sci. 2001 Mar;57(3):278-82. doi: 10.1002/ps.296.

Mode of action of new diethylamines in lycopene cyclase inhibition and in 
photosystem II turnover.

Fedtke C(1), Depka B, Schallner O, Tietjen K, Trebst A, Wollweber D, Wroblowsky 
HJ.

Author information:
(1)Landwirtschaftszentrum Monheim, Bayer AG, 51368 Leverkusen, Germany.

The new bleaching herbicidal compound N,N-diethyl-N-(2-undecynyl)amine (NDUA) is 
identified here as an inhibitor of lycopene cyclase and is compared with the 
known cyclase inhibitors N,N-diethyl-N-[2-(4-chlorophenylthio)ethyl]amine (CPTA) 
and N,N-diethyl-N-[2-(4-methylphenoxy)ethyl]amine (MTPA). HPLC separation of 
chloroplast pigments shows lycopene accumulation in NDUA treated tissue. 
Variation in chain length of the undecynylamine moeity of NDUA from 7 to 21 C 
atoms reveals an optimum of 11 to 14 C atoms for herbicidal activity. A series 
of seven further analogues of NDUA and CPTA reveals the structural elements 
necessary for inhibition of lycopene cyclase. The effect of NDUA derivatives on 
photosynthesis has been studied in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Photosynthesis is 
highly sensitive, particularly towards the C14 and longer chain length analogues 
at nanomolar concentrations. It is shown that the breakdown of photosynthesis by 
NDUA is due to interference with the turnover of the D1 protein of the 
photosystem II reaction centre that requires the continuous biosynthesis of the 
two reaction-centre beta-carotene moieties in the reassembly phase. The D1 
protein disappearance is most marked under strong light conditions. The 
depletion of photosystem II occurs before total pigment bleaching. This newly 
recognized mechanism in herbicidal activity is also the basis for the mode of 
action of other lycopene cyclase inhibitors as well as phytoene desaturase 
inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1002/ps.296
PMID: 11455658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Metab Eng. 2001 Oct;3(4):313-21. doi: 10.1006/mben.2001.0194.

Controlling the metabolic flux through the carotenoid pathway using directed 
mRNA processing and stabilization.

Smolke CD(1), Martin VJ, Keasling JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA 
94720, USA.

A synthetic operon containing the crtI and crtY genes, encoding the phytoene 
desaturase and the lycopene cyclase, respectively, was placed under the control 
of the araBAD promoter. DNA cassettes encoding mRNA secondary structures were 
placed at the 5' and 3' ends of the genes and a putative RNase E site was placed 
between the genes. This construct was transformed into Escherichia coli cells 
harboring the genes for phytoene production. By varying the mRNA secondary 
structures, we were able to modulate the flux through the carotenoid pathway, 
resulting in a 300-fold variation in the production of beta-carotene relative to 
lycopene. In addition, intermediates in the pathway from phytoene to 
beta-carotene production that are not observed in cells expressing the 
recombinant operon were observed when the engineered operons were used, 
indicating that changes in levels of the enzymes affected the formation of 
intermediates. These results indicate that it is possible to coordinately 
regulate the genes encoding the enzymes of a metabolic pathway and balance the 
production of the intermediates.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/mben.2001.0194
PMID: 11676567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Chromatogr A. 2001 Nov 30;936(1-2):59-69. doi:
10.1016/s0021-9673(01)00945-1.

Chromatographic performance on a C30-bonded stationary phase of 
monohydroxycarotenoids with variable chain length or degree of desaturation and 
of lycopene isomers synthesized by various carotene desaturases.

Breitenbach J(1), Braun G, Steiger S, Sandmann G.

Author information:
(1)Botanisches Institut, Goethe Universität, P.O. Box 111932, D-60054 Frankfurt, 
Germany.

Selectivity towards geometric isomers is a superior feature of a C30 polymeric 
stationary phase. Therefore, lycopene isomers synthesized in Escherichia coli 
transformants by catalysis of divers carotene desaturases were separated on this 
stationary phase. Due to their spectral characteristics and by co-chromatography 
with nuclear magnetic resonance-characterized carotene standards, some of them 
could be identified. Most of the lycopene isomers were cyclized by lycopene 
cyclase yielding mainly 9Z, 13Z and all-E beta-carotene. In contrast, 7,9,7',9'Z 
prolycopene is accumulating since it cannot be converted by this enzyme. Finally 
several acyclic hydroxycarotenoids with a chain of 30, 40 and 45 carbon atoms 
differing in the length of the polyene chain from 9 to 13 were separated on the 
C30 stationary phase. Longer retention times were observed when the length of 
the molecule increased and also when the conjugated double bond system was 
extended. Corresponding monocyclic carotenoids were less retained on the C30 
stationary phase and derivatives with an epsilon-ionone end group eluted earlier 
than with a beta-end group.

DOI: 10.1016/s0021-9673(01)00945-1
PMID: 11761006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Mol Genet Genomics. 2002 Feb;266(6):914-21. doi: 10.1007/s00438-001-0626-5.
Epub  2002 Jan 18.

Mutants of the carotene cyclase domain of al-2 from Neurospora crassa.

Arrach N(1), Schmidhauser TJ, Avalos J.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Genética, Universidad de Sevilla, Apartado 1095, 41080 
Sevilla, Spain.

Phytoene synthase and carotene cyclase, two key enzymes in carotenoid 
biosynthesis, are encoded by two separate genes in bacteria and plants, but by a 
single bifunctional gene in fungi. The cyclase function has been demonstrated 
for the products of the genes crtYB from the basidiomycete Xanthophyllomyces 
dendrorhous, and for carRA and carRP from the zygomycetes Phycomyces 
blakesleeanus and Mucor circinelloides, respectively. These three genes are 
highly similar to al-2 from Neurospora crassa. Taking advantage of the high 
proportion of the final product of the carotenoid pathway that accumulates 
Neurospora when mycelium is illuminated at low temperature, we have isolated two 
mutants with a pale reddish pigmentation. Both mutants are complemented by the 
wild-type al-2 gene, and carry mutations in the al-2 domain to which cyclase 
activity has been attributed in other fungi. The mutants lack neurosporaxanthin 
and accumulate an unidentified reddish carotenoid, as shown by column 
chromatography and HPLC. The chemical and spectrophotometrical properties of 
this carotenoid are consistent with the absence of carotenoid cyclization, and 
indicate that the product of al-2 is bifunctional. The existence of a single 
gene responsible for phytoene synthase and carotene cyclase thus seems to be a 
widespread trait among filamentous fungi, as shown by the examples now known in 
a basidiomycete, two zygomycetes and one ascomycete.

DOI: 10.1007/s00438-001-0626-5
PMID: 11862485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Nutr. 2002 Mar;132(3):506S-510S. doi: 10.1093/jn/132.3.506S.

Golden Rice: introducing the beta-carotene biosynthesis pathway into rice 
endosperm by genetic engineering to defeat vitamin A deficiency.

Beyer P(1), Al-Babili S, Ye X, Lucca P, Schaub P, Welsch R, Potrykus I.

Author information:
(1)University of Freiburg, Center for Applied Biosciences, D-79104 Freiburg, 
Germany. beyer@uni-freiburg.de

To obtain a functioning provitamin A (beta-carotene) biosynthetic pathway in 
rice endosperm, we introduced in a single, combined transformation effort the 
cDNA coding for phytoene synthase (psy) and lycopene beta-cyclase (beta-lcy) 
both from Narcissus pseudonarcissus and both under the control of the 
endosperm-specific glutelin promoter together with a bacterial phytoene 
desaturase (crtI, from Erwinia uredovora under constitutive 35S promoter 
control). This combination covers the requirements for beta-carotene synthesis 
and, as hoped, yellow beta-carotene-bearing rice endosperm was obtained in the 
T(0)-generation. Additional experiments revealed that the presence of beta-lcy 
was not necessary, because psy and crtI alone were able to drive beta-carotene 
synthesis as well as the formation of further downstream xanthophylls. Plausible 
explanations for this finding are that these downstream enzymes are 
constitutively expressed in rice endosperm or are induced by the transformation, 
e.g., by enzymatically formed products. Results using N. pseudonarcissus as a 
model system led to the development of a hypothesis, our present working model, 
that trans-lycopene or a trans-lycopene derivative acts as an inductor in a kind 
of feedback mechanism stimulating endogenous carotenogenic genes. Various 
institutional arrangements for disseminating Golden Rice to research institutes 
in developing countries also are discussed.

DOI: 10.1093/jn/132.3.506S
PMID: 11880581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


48. FEBS Lett. 2002 Mar 27;515(1-3):133-6. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(02)02453-5.

Involvement of NADPH in the cyclization reaction of carotenoid biosynthesis.

Hornero-Méndez D(1), Britton G.

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Liverpool, Life Sciences 
Building, Crown Street, L69 7ZB, Liverpool, UK.

Cyclic carotenoids, e.g. beta-carotene, are formed by cyclization of an acyclic 
precursor, lycopene. The gene, crtY, which encodes lycopene beta-cyclase, has a 
partial sequence characteristic of a pyridine nucleotide binding domain, and 
NAD(P)H has been reported to be an absolute requirement for the cyclization 
reaction in vitro. By complementary incubations with lycopene as substrate and 
with (4R)-[4-(2)H]NADPH in (1)H(2)O or with unlabelled NADPH in (2)H(2)O in the 
presence of the purified enzyme, it has now been shown that the hydrogen atom 
introduced at C(2) in the cyclization comes from water and not from NADPH. The 
previously proposed mechanism involving the initiation of cyclization by H(+) 
attack at C(2) of the folded acyclic end group of the precursor is thus 
confirmed. No hydrogen is transferred from NADPH, which is therefore not 
involved directly in the cyclization reaction, but must play an indirect role, 
e.g. as an allosteric activator.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(02)02453-5
PMID: 11943208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Bacteriol. 2002 Jun;184(11):2889-97. doi: 10.1128/JB.184.11.2889-2897.2002.

Identification of a lycopene beta-cyclase required for bacteriorhodopsin 
biogenesis in the archaeon Halobacterium salinarum.

Peck RF(1), Johnson EA, Krebs MP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin Medical School, 
Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Biogenesis of the light-driven proton pump bacteriorhodopsin in the archaeon 
Halobacterium salinarum requires coordinate synthesis of the bacterioopsin 
apoprotein and carotenoid precursors of retinal, which serves as a covalently 
bound cofactor. As a step towards elucidating the mechanism and regulation of 
carotenoid metabolism during bacteriorhodopsin biogenesis, we have identified an 
H. salinarum gene required for conversion of lycopene to beta-carotene, a 
retinal precursor. The gene, designated crtY, is predicted to encode an integral 
membrane protein homologous to lycopene beta-cyclases identified in bacteria and 
fungi. To test crtY function, we constructed H. salinarum strains with in-frame 
deletions in the gene. In the deletion strains, bacteriorhodopsin, retinal, and 
beta-carotene were undetectable, whereas lycopene accumulated to high levels ( 
approximately 1.3 nmol/mg of total cell protein). Heterologous expression of H. 
salinarum crtY in a lycopene-producing Escherichia coli strain resulted in 
beta-carotene production. These results indicate that H. salinarum crtY encodes 
a functional lycopene beta-cyclase required for bacteriorhodopsin biogenesis. 
Comparative sequence analysis yields a topological model of the protein and 
provides a plausible evolutionary connection between heterodimeric lycopene 
cyclases in bacteria and bifunctional lycopene cyclase-phytoene synthases in 
fungi.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.184.11.2889-2897.2002
PMCID: PMC135044
PMID: 12003928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. FEBS Lett. 2002 May 22;519(1-3):30-4. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(02)02699-6.

Metabolic engineering of xanthophyll content in tomato fruits.

Dharmapuri S(1), Rosati C, Pallara P, Aquilani R, Bouvier F, Camara B, Giuliano 
G.

Author information:
(1)ENEA, Casaccia Research Center, P.O. Box 2400, Rome 00100AD, Italy.

Ripe tomato fruits accumulate significant amounts of the linear carotene 
lycopene, but only trace amounts of xanthophylls (oxygenated carotenoids). We 
overexpressed the lycopene beta-cyclase (b-Lcy) and beta-carotene hydroxylase 
(b-Chy) genes under the control of the fruit-specific Pds promoter. Transgene 
and protein expression was followed through semi-quantitative reverse 
transcription-PCR, Western blotting, and enzyme assays. Fruits of the 
transformants showed a significant increase of beta-carotene, beta-cryptoxanthin 
and zeaxanthin. The carotenoid composition of leaves remained unaltered. The 
transgenes and the phenotype are inherited in a dominant Mendelian fashion. This 
is the first example of successful metabolic engineering of xanthophyll content 
in tomato fruits.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(02)02699-6
PMID: 12023013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Plant Physiol. 1994 May;105(1):405-413. doi: 10.1104/pp.105.1.405.

Carotenoid Biosynthesis during Tomato Fruit Development (Evidence for 
Tissue-Specific Gene Expression).

Fraser PD(1), Truesdale MR, Bird CR, Schuch W, Bramley PM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Royal Holloway, University of London, Egham 
Surrey, TW20 0EX, United Kingdom (P.D.F., M.R.T., P.M.B.).

Tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill. cv Ailsa Craig) fruit, at five stages of 
development, have been analyzed for their carotenoid and chlorophyll (Chl) 
contents, in vitro activities of phytoene synthase, phytoene desaturase, and 
lycopene cyclase, as well as expression of the phytoene synthase (Psy) and 
phytoene desaturase (Pds) genes. During ripening, the total carotenoids 
increased with a concomitant decrease in Chl. Although the highest carotenoid 
content (consisting mainly of lycopene and [beta]-carotene) was found in ripe 
fruit, the greatest carotenogenic enzymic activities were found in green fruit. 
Phytoene synthase was located in the plastid stroma, whereas the metabolism of 
phytoene was associated with plastid membranes during all stages of fruit 
development. The in vitro products of phytoene desaturation altered from being 
predominantly phytofluence and [zeta]-carotene in chloroplasts to becoming 
mainly lycopene in chromoplasts. The expression of Psy was detected in breaker 
and ripe fruit, as well as flowers, but was not detectable by northern blot 
analysis in leaves or green fruits. The Pds gene transcript was barely 
detectable in green fruit and leaves but was expressed in flowers and breaker 
fruit. These results suggest that transcription of Psy and Pds is regulated 
developmentally, with expression being considerably elevated in 
chromoplast-containing tissues. Antiserum to the Synechococcus phytoene synthase 
cross-reacted with phytoene synthase of green fruit only on western blots and 
not with the enzyme from ripe fruit. In contrast, a monoclonal antibody to the 
Psy gene product only cross-reacted with phytoene synthase from ripe fruit. The 
enzymes from green and ripe fruit had different molecular masses of 42 and 38 
kD, respectively. The absence of detectable Psy and Pds mRNA in green tissues 
using northern blot analyses, despite high levels of phytoene synthase and 
desaturase activity, lends support to the hypothesis of divergent genes encoding 
these enzymes.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.105.1.405
PMCID: PMC159369
PMID: 12232210


52. Trends Plant Sci. 2002 Oct;7(10):427-9. doi: 10.1016/s1360-1385(02)02329-4.

Carotenoid isomerase: a tale of light and isomers.

Giuliano G, Giliberto L, Rosati C.

Carotenoids are terpenoid pigments containing systems of conjugated double 
bonds, each of which can exist in a cis or trans configuration. The existence of 
a carotenoid isomerase (CrtISO) mediating cis-to-trans isomerization has been 
suspected ever since the description of the tomato tangerine mutant in the early 
1940s, whose fruits accumulate a poly-cis-isomer of lycopene. Recently, CrtISO 
has been cloned in Synechocystis and in plants, and has been shown to be related 
to bacterial carotene desaturases.

DOI: 10.1016/s1360-1385(02)02329-4
PMID: 12399171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003 Feb 20;1625(3):305-8. doi: 
10.1016/s0167-4781(03)00017-4.

cDNAs for the synthesis of cyclic carotenoids in petals of Gentiana lutea and 
their regulation during flower development.

Zhu C(1), Yamamura S, Nishihara M, Koiwa H, Sandmann G.

Author information:
(1)Iwate Biotechnology Research Center, 22-174-4 Narita, Kitakami, 024-0003, 
Iwate, Japan.

cDNAs encoding lycopene epsilon -cyclase, lycopene beta-cyclase, beta-carotene 
hydroxylase and zeaxanthin epoxidase were isolated from a Gentiana lutea petal 
cDNA library. The function of all cDNAs was analyzed by complementation in 
Escherichia coli. Transcript levels during different stages of flower 
development of G. lutea were determined and compared to the carotenoid 
composition. Expression of all genes increased by a factor of up to 2, with the 
exception of the lycopene epsilon -cyclase gene. The transcript amount of the 
latter was strongly decreased. These results indicate that during flower 
development, carotenoid formation is enhanced. Moreover, metabolites are shifted 
away from the biosynthetic branch to lutein and are channeled into beta-carotene 
and derivatives.

DOI: 10.1016/s0167-4781(03)00017-4
PMID: 12591618 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Plant Cell. 2003 Apr;15(4):874-84. doi: 10.1105/tpc.010249.

Activator mutagenesis of the pink scutellum1/viviparous7 locus of maize.

Singh M(1), Lewis PE, Hardeman K, Bai L, Rose JK, Mazourek M, Chomet P, Brutnell 
TP.

Author information:
(1)Boyce Thompson Institute, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.

The transposable elements Activator/Dissociation (Ac/Ds) were first discovered 
in maize, yet they have not been used extensively in their native host for 
gene-tagging experiments. This can be attributed largely to the low forward 
mutation rate and the propensity for closely linked transpositions associated 
with Ac and its nonautonomous deletion derivative Ds. To overcome these 
limitations, we are developing a series of nearly isogenic maize lines, each 
with a single active Ac element positioned at a well-defined location. These Ac 
elements are distributed at 10- to 20-centimorgan intervals throughout the 
genome for use in regional mutagenesis. Here, we demonstrate the utility of this 
Ac-based gene-tagging approach through the targeted mutagenesis of the pink 
scutellum1/viviparous7 (ps1/vp7) locus. Using a novel PCR-based technique, the 
Ps1 gene was cloned and Ac elements positioned precisely in each of the seven 
alleles recovered. The Ps1 gene is predicted to encode lycopene beta-cyclase and 
is necessary for the accumulation of both abscisic acid and the carotenoid 
zeaxanthin in mature maize embryos. This study demonstrates the utility of an Ac 
mutagenesis program to efficiently generate allelic diversity at closely linked 
loci in maize.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.010249
PMCID: PMC152336
PMID: 12671084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Arch Microbiol. 2003 Jun;179(6):409-15. doi: 10.1007/s00203-003-0545-4. Epub 
2003 Apr 24.

A novel type of lycopene epsilon-cyclase in the marine cyanobacterium 
Prochlorococcus marinus MED4.

Stickforth P(1), Steiger S, Hess WR, Sandmann G.

Author information:
(1)Botanical Institute, J.W. Goethe University, P.O. Box 111932, 60054 
Frankfurt, Germany.

Chlorophyll- b-possessing cyanobacteria of the genus Prochlorococcus share the 
presence of high amounts of alpha- and beta-carotenoids with green algae and 
higher plants. The branch point in carotenoid biosynthesis is the cyclization of 
lycopene, for which in higher plants two distinct enzymes are required, epsilon- 
and beta-lycopene cyclase. All cyanobacteria studied so far possess a single 
beta-cyclase. Here, two different Prochlorococcus sp. MED4 genes were 
functionally identified by heterologous gene complementation in Escherichia coli 
to encode lycopene cyclases. Whereas one is both functionally and in sequence 
highly similar to the beta-cyclase of Synechococcus sp. strain PCC 7942 and 
other cyanobacteria, the other showed several intriguing features. It acts as a 
bifunctional enzyme catalyzing the formation of epsilon- as well as of 
beta-ionone end groups. Expression of this cyclase in E. coli resulted in the 
simultaneous accumulation of alpha- beta-, delta-, and epsilon-carotene. Such an 
activity is in contrast to all lycopene epsilon-cyclases known so far, including 
those of the higher plants. Thus, for the first time among prokaryotes, two 
individual enzymes were identified in one organism that are responsible for the 
formation of cyclic carotenoids with either beta- or epsilon-end groups. These 
two genes are suggested to be designated as crtL-b and crtL-e. The results 
indicate that both enzymes might have originated from duplication of a single 
gene. Consequently, we suggest that multiple gene duplications followed by 
functional diversification resulted several times, and in independent lineages, 
in the appearance of enzymes for the biosynthesis of cyclic carotenoids.

DOI: 10.1007/s00203-003-0545-4
PMID: 12712234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Int Microbiol. 2003 Mar;6(1):11-6. doi: 10.1007/s10123-003-0097-0. Epub 2003
Feb  12.

Genetic basis of microbial carotenogenesis.

Sieiro C(1), Poza M, de Miguel T, Villa TG.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Microbiología y Parasitología, Facultad de Farmacia, 
Universidad de Santiago de Compostela, 15782, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

The synthesis of carotenoids begins with the formation of a phytoene from 
geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate, a well conserved step in all carotenogenic 
organisms and catalyzed by a phytoene synthase, an enzyme encoded by the crtB ( 
spy) genes. The next step is the dehydrogenation of the phytoene, which is 
carried out by phytoene dehydrogenase. In organisms with oxygenic 
photosynthesis, this enzyme, which accomplishes two dehydrogenations, is encoded 
by the crtP genes. In organisms that lack oxygenic photosynthesis, 
dehydrogenation is carried out by an enzyme completely unrelated to the former 
one, which carries out four dehydrogenations and is encoded by the crtI genes. 
In organisms with oxygenic photosynthesis, dehydrogenation of the phytoene is 
accomplished by a zeta-carotene dehydrogenase encoded by the crtQ ( zds) genes. 
In many carotenogenic organisms, the process is completed with the cyclization 
of lycopene. In organisms exhibiting oxygenic photosynthesis, this step is 
performed by a lycopene cyclase encoded by the crtL genes. In contrast, 
anoxygenic photosynthetic and non-photosynthetic organisms use a different 
lycopene cyclase, encoded by the crtY ( lyc) genes. A third and unrelated type 
of lycopene beta-cyclase has been described in certain bacteria and archaea. 
Fungi differ from the rest of non-photosynthetic organisms in that they have a 
bifunctional enzyme that displays both phytoene synthase and lycopene cyclase 
activity. Carotenoids can be modified by oxygen-containing functional groups, 
thus originating xanthophylls. Only two enzymes are necessary for the conversion 
of beta-carotene into astaxanthin, using several ketocarotenoids as 
intermediates, in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. These enzymes are a 
beta-carotene hydroxylase ( crtZ genes) and a beta-carotene ketolase, encoded by 
the crtW (bacteria) or bkt (algae) genes.

DOI: 10.1007/s10123-003-0097-0
PMID: 12730708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Jun 6;305(3):586-91. doi: 
10.1016/s0006-291x(03)00798-8.

Fusion-type lycopene beta-cyclase from a thermoacidophilic archaeon Sulfolobus 
solfataricus.

Hemmi H(1), Ikejiri S, Nakayama T, Nishino T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Engineering, Graduate School of Engineering, 
Tohoku University, Aoba-yama 07, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8579, Japan.

Examination of the sequence of a hypothetical gene with an unknown function 
included in the carotenogenic gene cluster in the genome of a thermoacidophilic 
archaeon Sulfolobus solfataricus led to the prediction that the gene encodes a 
novel-type lycopene beta-cyclase, whose N- and C-terminal halves are homologous 
to the subunits of the bacterial heterodimeric enzymes. The recombinant 
expression of the gene in lycopene-producing Escherichia coli resulted in the 
accumulation of beta-carotene in the cells, which verifies the function of the 
gene. Homologues of the archaeal lycopene beta-cyclase from various organisms 
such as bacteria, archaea, and fungi have been reported. Although their primary 
structures are clearly specific to the biological taxa, a phylogenetic analysis 
revealed the unexpected complicity of the evolutional route of these enzymes.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-291x(03)00798-8
PMID: 12763034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Chem Biol. 2003 May;10(5):453-62. doi: 10.1016/s1074-5521(03)00103-0.

Biosynthesis of structurally novel carotenoids in Escherichia coli.

Lee PC(1), Momen AZ, Mijts BN, Schmidt-Dannert C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Biophysics, 1479 Gortner 
Avenue, University of Minnesota, Saint Paul, MN 55108, USA.

Comment in
    Chem Biol. 2003 Jun;10(6):478-9.

Previously, we utilized in vitro evolution to alter the catalytic functions of 
several carotenoid enzymes and produce the novel carotenoids 
tetradehydrolycopene and torulene in Escherichia coli. Here we report on the 
successful extension of these pathways and the C(30) carotenoid 
diaponeurosporene pathway with additional carotenoid genes. Extension of the 
known acyclic C(30) pathway with C(40) carotenoid enzymes-spheroidene 
monooxygenase and lycopene cyclase-yielded new oxygenated acylic products and 
the unnatural cyclic C(30) diapotorulene, respectively. Extension of acyclic 
C(40) pathways with spheroidene monooxygenase generated novel oxygenated 
carotenoids including the violet phillipsiaxanthin. Extension of the torulene 
biosynthetic pathway with carotene hydroxylase, desaturase, glucosylase, and 
ketolase yielded new torulene derivatives. These results demonstrate the utility 
of extending an in vitro evolved central metabolic pathway with catalytically 
promiscuous downstream enzymes in order to generate structurally novel 
compounds.

DOI: 10.1016/s1074-5521(03)00103-0
PMID: 12770827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. FEBS Lett. 2003 Jun 19;545(2-3):120-6. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(03)00513-1.

Structural and functional analysis of a lycopene beta-monocyclase gene isolated 
from a unique marine bacterium that produces myxol.

Teramoto M(1), Takaichi S, Inomata Y, Ikenaga H, Misawa N.

Author information:
(1)Marine Biotechnology Institute, 3-75-1 Heita, Kamaishi-shi, Iwate 026-0001, 
Japan. maki.teramoto@mbio.jp

A gene coding for lycopene beta-monocyclase, which metabolizes lycopene 
(psi,psi-carotene) to gamma-carotene (beta,psi-carotene), was isolated for the 
first time from a unique marine bacterium strain P99-3 that produces myxol (a 
gamma-carotene derivative). This lycopene beta-monocyclase gene (designated 
crtYm) was included in the gene cluster which contained carotenoid biosynthetic 
gene (crtI, crtB, crtZ, crtY, and crtA) homologs. CrtYm, the CrtY homolog, 
metabolized lycopene to gamma-carotene, which was confirmed by 
deletion/expression analysis of the crtYm and by subsequent analysis of the 
metabolites from lycopene based on the retention times on high-performance 
liquid chromatography, UV-visible absorption spectra, and mass spectrometry.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(03)00513-1
PMID: 12804761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Chem Biol. 2003 Jun;10(6):478-9. doi: 10.1016/s1074-5521(03)00131-5.

Novel carotenoids genetically engineered in a heterologous host.

Sandmann G(1).

Author information:
(1)Biosynthesis Group, Botanical Institute, J.W. Goethe Universität Frankfurt, 
P.O. Box 111932, D-60054, Frankfurt, Germany.

Comment on
    Chem Biol. 2003 May;10(5):453-62.

Carotenoids are commercially important pigments that are essential for human 
health. Diverse carotenoids have been identified, but availability has impeded 
evaluation of their pharmaceutical potential. Molecular techniques have been 
developed to produce specific and novel carotenoids with improved biological 
activities.

DOI: 10.1016/s1074-5521(03)00131-5
PMID: 12837379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]61. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2003 Jul;69(7):3728-38. doi: 
10.1128/AEM.69.7.3728-3738.2003.

Metabolic engineering of the carotenoid biosynthetic pathway in the yeast 
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous (Phaffia rhodozyma).

Verdoes JC(1), Sandmann G, Visser H, Diaz M, van Mossel M, van Ooyen AJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Industrial Microbiology, Department of Agrotechnology and Food 
Sciences, Wageningen University, Dreijenlaan 2, 6703 HA Wageningen, The 
Netherlands.

The crtYB locus was used as an integrative platform for the construction of 
specific carotenoid biosynthetic mutants in the astaxanthin-producing yeast 
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. The crtYB gene of X. dendrorhous, encoding a 
chimeric carotenoid biosynthetic enzyme, could be inactivated by both single and 
double crossover events, resulting in non-carotenoid-producing transformants. In 
addition, the crtYB gene, linked to either its homologous or a 
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase promoter, was overexpressed in the wild 
type and a beta-carotene-accumulating mutant of X. dendrorhous. In several 
transformants containing multiple copies of the crtYB gene, the total carotenoid 
content was higher than in the control strain. This increase was mainly due to 
an increase of the beta-carotene and echinone content, whereas the total content 
of astaxanthin was unaffected or even lower. Overexpression of the phytoene 
synthase-encoding gene (crtI) had a large impact on the ratio between mono- and 
bicyclic carotenoids. Furthermore, we showed that in metabolic engineered X. 
dendrorhous strains, the competition between the enzymes phytoene desaturase and 
lycopene cyclase for lycopene governs the metabolic flux either via 
beta-carotene to astaxanthin or via 3,4-didehydrolycopene to 
3-hydroxy-3'-4'-didehydro-beta-psi-caroten-4-one (HDCO). The monocylic 
carotenoid torulene and HDCO, normally produced as minority carotenoids, were 
the main carotenoids produced in these strains.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.69.7.3728-3738.2003
PMCID: PMC165150
PMID: 12839738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Plant Mol Biol. 2003 May;52(2):343-56. doi: 10.1023/a:1023948929665.

Light induction of carotenoid biosynthesis genes in the green alga Haematococcus 
pluvialis: regulation by photosynthetic redox control.

Steinbrenner J(1), Linden H.

Author information:
(1)Lehrstuhl für Physiologie und Biochemie der Pflanzen, Universität Konstanz, 
78434 Konstanz, Germany.

The unicellular green alga Haematococcus pluvialis accumulates large amounts of 
the red ketocarotenoid astaxanthin when exposed to various stress situations 
such as salt stress and high light intensities. Here, the light regulation of 
Haematococcus carotenoid biosynthesis was examined. Isolation and 
characterization of the lycopene beta cyclase gene involved in carotenoid 
biosynthesis was carried out using a functional complementation approach. 
Subsequently, gene expression of lycopene cyclase, phytoene synthase, phytoene 
desaturase and carotenoid hydroxylase was analysed in green flagellate cells. 
All four genes revealed higher transcript levels in response to increased 
illumination. Not only the induction of astaxanthin biosynthesis but also 
carotenoid gene expression was found to be correlated with the redox state of 
the photosynthetic electron transport. In accordance with this result, increased 
transcript levels for carotenoid biosynthesis genes were detected under both 
blue and red light conditions. The application of different inhibitors of the 
photosynthetic electron flow indicated that the photosynthetic plastoquinone 
pool functions as the redox sensor for the up-regulation of carotenoid 
biosynthesis genes. These results suggested that in Haematococcus not only the 
specific astaxanthin pathway but also general carotenoid biosynthesis is subject 
to photosynthetic redox control.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1023948929665
PMID: 12856941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2003 Aug;69(8):4676-82. doi: 
10.1128/AEM.69.8.4676-4682.2003.

Alternative splicing of transcripts from crtI and crtYB genes of 
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous.

Lodato P(1), Alcaino J, Barahona S, Retamales P, Cifuentes V.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Ciencias Ecológicas, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de 
Chile, Santiago, Chile.

Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous is one of the relevant sources of the carotenoid 
astaxanthin. In this paper, we describe for the first time cloning of unexpected 
cDNAs obtained from the crtI and crtYB genes of X. dendrorhous strain UCD 
67-385. The cDNA of the crtI gene conserves 80 bp of the first intron, while the 
cDNA of the crtYB gene conserves 55 bp of the first intron and lacks 111 bp of 
the second exon. The crtI and crtYB RNAs could be spliced in alternative splice 
sites, which produced alternative transcripts which could not be translated to 
active CRTI and CRTYB proteins since they had numerous stop codons in their 
sequences. The ratio of mature mRNA to alternative mRNA for the crtI gene 
decreased as a function of the age of the culture, while the cellular content of 
carotenoids increased. It is possible that splicing to mature or alternative 
transcripts could regulate the cellular concentrations of phytoene desaturase 
and phytoene synthase-lycopene cyclase proteins, depending on the physiological 
or environmental conditions.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.69.8.4676-4682.2003
PMCID: PMC169127
PMID: 12902257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Exp Bot. 2003 Oct;54(391):2215-30. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erg235.

Maize phytoene desaturase and zeta-carotene desaturase catalyse a poly-Z 
desaturation pathway: implications for genetic engineering of carotenoid content 
among cereal crops.

Matthews PD(1), Luo R, Wurtzel ET.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Lehman College and The Graduate School and 
University Center, The City University of New York, 250 Bedford Park Blvd. West, 
Bronx, NY 10468, USA.

Carotene desaturation, an essential step in the biosynthesis of coloured 
carotenoids, has received much attention (1) as a target of bleaching herbicide 
action, (2) as a determinant of geometric isomer states of carotenoids and their 
metabolites, and (3) as a key modulator of accumulation and structural 
variability of carotenoids. Having previously isolated and functionally 
characterized the cDNA encoding the first enzyme in maize carotene desaturation, 
phytoene desaturase (PDS), the isolation and functional characterization of the 
second desaturase, a maize endosperm cDNA (2265 bp) encoding zetacarotene 
(zeta-carotene) desaturase (ZDS) is reported here. Functional analysis of the 
concerted actions of maize PDS and ZDS ex situ showed these enzymes to mediate a 
poly-Z desaturation pathway to the predominate geometric isomer 
7,9,7',9'-tetra-Z-lycopene (poly-Z-lycopene or prolycopene), and not the 
all-trans substrate required of the downstream lycopene cyclase enzymes. This 
finding suggests a rate-controlling isomerase associated with the carotene 
desaturases as a corollary of a default poly-Z carotenoid biosynthetic pathway 
active in planta for maize. Comparative gene analysis between maize and rice 
revealed that genes encoding PDS and ZDS are single copy; the Zds cDNA 
characterized here was mapped to maize chromosome 7S and vp9 is suggested as a 
candidate locus for the structural gene while y9 is ruled out. Classical genetic 
resources were used to dissect the desaturation steps further and 
hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase was linked to the vp2 locus, narrowing 
candidate loci for an obligate isomerase in maize to only a few. Since the first 
functional analysis of the paired carotene desaturases for a cereal crop is 
reported here, the implications for the genetic modification of the pro-vitamin 
A content in cereal crops such as rice and maize, are discussed.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erg235
PMID: 14504297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Metab Eng. 2003 Oct;5(4):255-63. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2003.08.001.

Coordinate expression of multiple bacterial carotenoid genes in canola leading 
to altered carotenoid production.

Ravanello MP(1), Ke D, Alvarez J, Huang B, Shewmaker CK.

Author information:
(1)Monsanto Company, Calgene Campus, 1920 Fifth St, Davis, CA 95616, USA. 
monica.p.ravello@monsanto.com

Carotenoids have drawn much attention recently because of their potentially 
positive benefits to human health as well as their utility in both food and 
animal feed. Previous work in canola (Brassica napus) seed over-expressing the 
bacterial phytoene synthase gene (crtB) demonstrated a change in carotenoid 
content, such that the total levels of carotenoids, including phytoene and 
downstream metabolites like beta-carotene, were elevated 50-fold, with the ratio 
of beta- to alpha-carotene being 2:1. This result raised the possibility that 
the composition of metabolites in this pathway could be modified further in 
conjunction with the increased flux obtained with crtB. Here we report on the 
expression of additional bacterial genes for the enzymes geranylgeranyl 
diphosphate synthase (crtE), phytoene desaturase (crtI) and lycopene cyclase 
(crtY and the plant B. napus lycopene beta-cyclase) engineered in conjunction 
with phytoene synthase (crtB) in transgenic canola seed. Analysis of the 
carotenoid levels by HPLC revealed a 90% decrease in phytoene levels for the 
double construct expressing crtB in conjunction with crtI. The transgenic seed 
from all the double constructs, including the one expressing the bacterial crtB 
and the plant lycopene beta-cyclase showed an increase in the levels of total 
carotenoid similar to that previously observed by expressing crtB alone but 
minimal effects were observed with respect to the ratio of beta- to 
alpha-carotene compared to the original construct. However, the beta- to 
alpha-carotene ratio was increased from 2:1 to 3:1 when a triple construct 
consisting of the bacterial phytoene synthase, phytoene desaturase and lycopene 
cyclase genes were expressed together. This result suggests that the bacterial 
genes may form an aggregate complex that allows in vivo activity of all three 
proteins through substrate channeling. This finding should allow further 
manipulation of the carotenoid biosynthetic pathway for downstream products with 
enhanced agronomic, animal feed and human nutritional values.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymben.2003.08.001
PMID: 14642353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


66. FEMS Yeast Res. 2003 Dec;4(3):221-31. doi: 10.1016/S1567-1356(03)00158-2.

Metabolic engineering of the astaxanthin-biosynthetic pathway of 
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous.

Visser H(1), van Ooyen AJ, Verdoes JC.

Author information:
(1)Section of Fungal Genomics, Wageningen University, Dreijenlaan 2, 6703 HA, 
Wageningen, The Netherlands. hans.visser@wur.nl

This review describes the different approaches that have been used to manipulate 
and improve carotenoid production in Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. The red 
yeast X. dendrorhous (formerly known as Phaffia rhodozyma) is one of the 
microbiological production systems for natural astaxanthin. Astaxanthin is 
applied in food and feed industry and can be used as a nutraceutical because of 
its strong antioxidant properties. However, the production levels of astaxanthin 
in wild-type isolates are rather low. To increase the astaxanthin content in X. 
dendrorhous, cultivation protocols have been optimized and 
astaxanthin-hyperproducing mutants have been obtained by screening of 
classically mutagenized X. dendrorhous strains. The knowledge about the 
regulation of carotenogenesis in X. dendrorhous is still limited in comparison 
to that in other carotenogenic fungi. The X. dendrorhous carotenogenic genes 
have been cloned and a X. dendrorhous transformation system has been developed. 
These tools allowed the directed genetic modification of the astaxanthin pathway 
in X. dendrorhous. The crtYB gene, encoding the bifunctional enzyme phytoene 
synthase/lycopene cyclase, was inactivated by insertion of a vector by single 
and double cross-over events, indicating that it is possible to generate 
specific carotenoid-biosynthetic mutants. Additionally, overexpression of crtYB 
resulted in the accumulation of beta-carotene and echinone, which indicates that 
the oxygenation reactions are rate-limiting in these recombinant strains. 
Furthermore, overexpression of the phytoene desaturase-encoding gene (crtI) 
showed an increase in monocyclic carotenoids such as torulene and HDCO 
(3-hydroxy-3',4'-didehydro-beta,-psi-carotene-4-one) and a decrease in bicyclic 
carotenoids such as echinone, beta-carotene and astaxanthin.

DOI: 10.1016/S1567-1356(03)00158-2
PMID: 14654426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Plant Physiol. 2004 Feb;134(2):824-37. doi: 10.1104/pp.103.031104. Epub 2004
Jan  22.

Accumulation of carotenoids and expression of carotenoid biosynthetic genes 
during maturation in citrus fruit.

Kato M(1), Ikoma Y, Matsumoto H, Sugiura M, Hyodo H, Yano M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Citrus Research, National Institute of Fruit Tree Science, 
Shimizu-okitsunakacho, Shizuoka 424-0292, Japan. masayaka@affrc.go.jp

The relationship between carotenoid accumulation and the expression of 
carotenoid biosynthetic genes during fruit maturation was investigated in three 
citrus varieties, Satsuma mandarin (Citrus unshiu Marc.), Valencia orange 
(Citrus sinensis Osbeck), and Lisbon lemon (Citrus limon Burm.f.). We cloned the 
cDNAs for phytoene synthase (CitPSY), phytoene desaturase (CitPDS), 
zeta-carotene (car) desaturase (CitZDS), carotenoid isomerase (CitCRTISO), 
lycopene beta-cyclase (CitLCYb), beta-ring hydroxylase (CitHYb), zeaxanthin 
(zea) epoxidase (CitZEP), and lycopene epsilon-cyclase (CitLCYe) from Satsuma 
mandarin, which shared high identities in nucleotide sequences with Valencia 
orange, Lisbon lemon, and other plant species. With the transition of peel color 
from green to orange, the change from beta,epsilon-carotenoid (alpha-car and 
lutein) accumulation to beta,beta-carotenoid (beta-car, beta-cryptoxanthin, zea, 
and violaxanthin) accumulation was observed in the flavedos of Satsuma mandarin 
and Valencia orange, accompanying the disappearance of CitLCYe transcripts and 
the increase in CitLCYb transcripts. Even in green fruit, high levels of 
beta,epsilon-carotenoids and CitLCYe transcripts were not observed in the juice 
sacs. As fruit maturation progressed in Satsuma mandarin and Valencia orange, a 
simultaneous increase in the expression of genes (CitPSY, CitPDS, CitZDS, 
CitLCYb, CitHYb, and CitZEP) led to massive beta,beta-xanthophyll 
(beta-cryptoxanthin, zea, and violaxanthin) accumulation in both the flavedo and 
juice sacs. The gene expression of CitCRTISO was kept low or decreased in the 
flavedo during massive beta,beta-xanthophyll accumulation. In the flavedo of 
Lisbon lemon and Satsuma mandarin, massive accumulation of phytoene was observed 
with a decrease in the transcript level for CitPDS. Thus, the carotenoid 
accumulation during citrus fruit maturation was highly regulated by the 
coordination of the expression among carotenoid biosynthetic genes. In this 
paper, the mechanism leading to diversity in beta,beta-xanthophyll compositions 
between Satsuma mandarin and Valencia orange was also discussed on the basis of 
the substrate specificity of beta-ring hydroxylase and the balance of expression 
between upstream synthesis genes (CitPSY, CitPDS, CitZDS, and CitLCYb) and 
downstream synthesis genes (CitHYb and CitZEP).

DOI: 10.1104/pp.103.031104
PMCID: PMC344557
PMID: 14739348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Mol Genet Genomics. 2004 Mar;271(2):180-8. doi: 10.1007/s00438-003-0969-1.
Epub  2004 Jan 22.

Asymmetrically acting lycopene beta-cyclases (CrtLm) from non-photosynthetic 
bacteria.

Tao L(1), Picataggio S, Rouvière PE, Cheng Q.

Author information:
(1)Biological and Chemical Sciences and Engineering, Central Research and 
Development, Experimental Station, E I DuPont de Nemours Inc, E328/B48, 
Wilmington, DE 19880-0328, USA.

Carotenoids have important functions in photosynthesis, nutrition, and 
protection against oxidative damage. Some natural carotenoids are asymmetrical 
molecules that are difficult to produce chemically. Biological production of 
carotenoids using specific enzymes is a potential alternative to extraction from 
natural sources. Here we report the isolation of lycopene beta-cyclases that 
selectively cyclize only one end of lycopene or neurosporene. The crtLm genes 
encoding the asymmetrically acting lycopene beta-cyclases were isolated from 
non-photosynthetic bacteria that produced monocyclic carotenoids. Co-expression 
of these crtLm genes with the crtEIB genes from Pantoea stewartii (responsible 
for lycopene synthesis) resulted in the production of monocyclic gamma-carotene 
in Escherichia coli. The asymmetric cyclization activity of CrtLm could be 
inhibited by the lycopene beta-cyclase inhibitor 
2-(4-chlorophenylthio)-triethylamine (CPTA). Phylogenetic analysis suggested 
that bacterial CrtL-type lycopene beta-cyclases might represent an evolutionary 
link between the common bacterial CrtY-type of lycopene beta-cyclases and plant 
lycopene beta- and epsilon-cyclases. These lycopene beta-cyclases may be used 
for efficient production of high-value asymmetrically cyclized carotenoids.

DOI: 10.1007/s00438-003-0969-1
PMID: 14740205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2004 Oct;65(5):538-46. doi: 
10.1007/s00253-004-1619-1. Epub 2004 May 27.

Investigation of factors influencing production of the monocyclic carotenoid 
torulene in metabolically engineered Escherichia coli.

Lee PC(1), Mijts BN, Schmidt-Dannert C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of 
Minnesota, 1479 Gortner Avenue, St. Paul 55108, USA.

Factors influencing production of the monocyclic carotenoid torulene in 
recombinant Escherichia coli were investigated by modulating enzyme expression 
level, culture conditions, and engineering of the isoprenoid precursor pathway. 
The gene dosage of in vitro evolved lycopene cyclase crtY2 significantly changed 
the carotenoid profile. A culture temperature of 28 degrees C showed better 
production of torulene than 37 degrees C while initial culture pH had no 
significant effect on torulene production. Glucose-containing LB, 2xYT, TB and 
MR media significantly repressed the production of torulene, and the other 
carotenoids lycopene, tetradehydrolycopene, and beta-carotene, in E. coli. In 
contrast, glycerol-containing LB, 2xYT, TB, and MR media enhanced torulene 
production. Overexpression of dxs, dxr, idi and/or ispA, individually and 
combinatorially, enhanced torulene production up to 3.1-3.3 fold. High torulene 
production was observed in a high dissolved oxygen level bioreactor in TB and MR 
media containing glycerol. Lycopene was efficiently converted into torulene 
during aerobic cultures, indicating that the engineered torulene synthesis 
pathway is well coordinated, and maintains the functionality and integrity of 
the carotenogenic enzyme complex.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-004-1619-1
PMID: 15168092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2004 Dec;66(2):153-9. doi:
10.1007/s00253-004-1669-4.  Epub 2004 Jul 10.

Biotechnological lycopene production by mated fermentation of Blakeslea 
trispora.

López-Nieto MJ(1), Costa J, Peiro E, Méndez E, Rodríguez-Sáiz M, de la Fuente 
JL, Cabri W, Barredo JL.

Author information:
(1)R&D Biology, Antibióticos S.A., Avenida de Antibióticos 59-61, 24009 León, 
Spain.

A semi-industrial process (800-l fermentor) for lycopene production by mated 
fermentation of Blakeslea trispora plus (+) and minus (-) strains has been 
developed. The culture medium was designed at the flask scale, using a program 
based on a genetic algorithm; and a fermentation process by means of this medium 
was developed. Fermentation involves separate vegetative phases for (+) and (-) 
strains and inoculation of the production medium with a mix of both together. 
Feeding with imidazole or pyridine, molecules known to inhibit lycopene cyclase 
enzymatic activity, enhanced lycopene accumulation. Different raw materials and 
physical parameters, including dissolved oxygen, stirring speed, air flow rate, 
temperature, and pH, were checked in the fermentor to get maximum lycopene 
production. Typical data for the fermentation process are presented and 
discussed. This technology can be easily scaled-up to an industrial application 
for the production of this carotenoid nowadays widely in demand.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-004-1669-4
PMID: 15248041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2004 Sep;70(9):5589-94. doi: 
10.1128/AEM.70.9.5589-5594.2004.

Blakeslea trispora genes for carotene biosynthesis.

Rodríguez-Sáiz M(1), Paz B, De La Fuente JL, López-Nieto MJ, Cabri W, Barredo 
JL.

Author information:
(1)R and D Biology, Antibióticos S.A., Avenida de Antibióticos 59-61, E-24009 
León, Spain.

We cloned the carB and carRA genes involved in beta-carotene biosynthesis from 
overproducing and wild-type strains of Blakeslea trispora. The carB gene has a 
length of 1,955 bp, including two introns of 141 and 68 bp, and encodes a 
protein of 66.4 kDa with phytoene dehydrogenase activity. The carRA gene 
contains 1,894 bp, with a single intron of 70 bp, and encodes a protein of 69.6 
kDa with separate domains for lycopene cyclase and phytoene synthase. The 
estimated transcript sizes for carB and carRA were 1.8 and 1.9 kb, respectively. 
CarB from the beta-carotene-overproducing strain B. trispora F-744 had an S528R 
mutation and a TAG instead of a TAA stop codon. The overproducing strain also 
had a P143S mutation in CarRA. Both B. trispora genes could complement mutations 
in orthologous genes in Mucor circinelloides and could be used to construct 
transformed strains of M. circinelloides that produced higher levels of 
beta-carotene than did the nontransformed parent. The results show that these 
genes are conserved across the zygomycetes and that the B. trispora carB and 
carRA genes are functional and potentially useable to increase carotenoid 
production.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.70.9.5589-5594.2004
PMCID: PMC520866
PMID: 15345447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Agric Food Chem. 2004 Nov 3;52(22):6724-31. doi: 10.1021/jf049607f.

Biochemical and molecular analysis of carotenoid biosynthesis in flavedo of 
orange (Citrus sinensis L.) during fruit development and maturation.

Rodrigo MJ(1), Marcos JF, Zacarías L.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Agroquímica y Tecnología de Alimentos (CSIC), Apartado Postal 
73, 46100 Burjassot, Valencia, Spain.

Changes in carotenoid content and composition and expression of carotenoid 
biosynthetic genes were analyzed in the flavedo of sweet orange (Citrus sinensis 
L. Osbeck, cv. Navelate) fruit during development and maturation. Lutein and 
all-E-violaxanthin were the major carotenoids in chloroplast-containing tissues. 
During fruit coloration, phytoene, beta-cryptoxanthin, zeaxanthin, and mainly 
(9Z)-violaxanthin progressively accumulated, and a large proportion of 
apocarotenoids was also found in the flavedo of full-colored fruits. We have 
cloned partial and full-length cDNAs corresponding to genes involved in early 
condensation and desaturase reactions [phytoene synthase (PSY), phytoene 
desaturase (PDS), and zeta-carotene desaturase (ZDS)], coupled redox reaction 
(plastid terminal oxidase), cyclizations [beta-lycopene cyclase (beta-LCY) and 
epsilon-lycopene cyclase (epsilon-LCY)], hydroxylation [beta-carotene 
hydroxylase (beta-CHX)], and epoxidation [zeaxanthin epoxidase (ZEP)] and 
analyzed their mRNA accumulation in the flavedo of fruits during development and 
ripening as compared with those of leaves. Collectively, the results indicated 
that PDS gene expression correlated with carotenoid content in developing fruit 
and that up-regulation of PSY and ZDS genes at the onset of fruit coloration 
would enhance the production of linear carotenes and the flux into the pathway. 
The shift from the beta,epsilon-branch to the beta,beta-branch of the pathway 
that originates the changes in carotenoid composition during fruit coloration 
may be explained by a down-regulation of epsilon-LCY and by the increase of the 
beta-CHX transcript.

DOI: 10.1021/jf049607f
PMID: 15506808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2005 Jun;67(4):549-55. doi: 
10.1007/s00253-005-1941-2. Epub 2005 Mar 3.

Analysis of mating-dependent transcription of Blakeslea trispora carotenoid 
biosynthesis genes carB and carRA by quantitative real-time PCR.

Schmidt AD(1), Heinekamp T, Matuschek M, Liebmann B, Bollschweiler C, Brakhage 
AA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz-Institute for 
Natural Products Research and Infection Biology, Hans-Knoell-Institute, Jena, 
Germany.

The zygomycete fungus Blakeslea trispora is used commercially as natural source 
of beta-carotene. beta-Carotene production is strongly induced during mating of 
two strains of the opposite sex and results in the production of the pheromone 
trisporic acid, which in turn stimulates enhanced beta-carotene biosynthesis. 
beta-Carotene production is due to the enzymatic activity of phytoene synthase, 
lycopene cyclase and phytoene dehydrogenase. The corresponding genes, carRA and 
carB, were isolated from a cosmid library generated from B. trispora strain 
ATCC14272. The steady state level of carB and carRA mRNA transcripts under 
different mating conditions was monitored by both northern blot analysis and 
quantitative real-time PCR. The steady state levels of carRA and carB mRNA of 
non-mated and mated B. trispora were quantified relative to transcript levels of 
the translation elongation factor 1alpha-encoding tef1 gene, since tef1 is 
transcribed independently of mating. Transcription levels of both carB and carRA 
were strongly induced only under mating conditions. These data suggest that 
beta-carotene production in B. trispora is due to increased transcription of the 
biosynthesis genes carB and carRA.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-005-1941-2
PMID: 15744487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Plant Physiol. 2005 May;138(1):441-50. doi: 10.1104/pp.104.057927. Epub 2005
Apr  8.

Why is golden rice golden (yellow) instead of red?

Schaub P(1), Al-Babili S, Drake R, Beyer P.

Author information:
(1)Center for Applied Biosciences, University of Freiburg, D-79104 Freiburg, 
Germany.

The endosperm of Golden Rice (Oryza sativa) is yellow due to the accumulation of 
beta-carotene (provitamin A) and xanthophylls. The product of the two carotenoid 
biosynthesis transgenes used in Golden Rice, phytoene synthase (PSY) and the 
bacterial carotene desaturase (CRTI), is lycopene, which has a red color. The 
absence of lycopene in Golden Rice shows that the pathway proceeds beyond the 
transgenic end point and thus that the endogenous pathway must also be acting. 
By using TaqMan real-time PCR, we show in wild-type rice endosperm the mRNA 
expression of the relevant carotenoid biosynthetic enzymes encoding phytoene 
desaturase, zeta-carotene desaturase, carotene cis-trans-isomerase, 
beta-lycopene cyclase, and beta-carotene hydroxylase; only PSY mRNA was 
virtually absent. We show that the transgenic phenotype is not due to 
up-regulation of expression of the endogenous rice pathway in response to the 
transgenes, as was suggested to be the case in tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) 
fruit, where CRTI expression resulted in a similar carotenoid phenomenon. This 
means that beta-carotene and xanthophyll formation in Golden Rice relies on the 
activity of constitutively expressed intrinsic rice genes (carotene 
cis-trans-isomerase, alpha/beta-lycopene cyclase, beta-carotene hydroxylase). 
PSY needs to be supplemented and the need for the CrtI transgene in Golden Rice 
is presumably due to insufficient activity of the phytoene desaturase and/or 
zeta-carotene desaturase enzyme in endosperm. The effect of CRTI expression was 
also investigated in leaves of transgenic rice and Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis 
thaliana). Here, again, the mRNA levels of intrinsic carotenogenic enzymes 
remained unaffected; nevertheless, the carotenoid pattern changed, showing a 
decrease in lutein, while the beta-carotene-derived xanthophylls increased. This 
shift correlated with CRTI-expression and is most likely governed at the enzyme 
level by lycopene-cis-trans-isomerism. Possible implications are discussed.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.104.057927
PMCID: PMC1104197
PMID: 15821145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Biotechnol Lett. 2005 Jun;27(11):779-82. doi: 10.1007/s10529-005-5793-8.

Lycopene-epsilon-cyclase pre-mRNA is alternatively spliced in Cara Cara navel 
orange (Citrus sinensis Osbeck).

Tao NG(1), Xu J, Cheng YJ, Deng XX.

Author information:
(1)National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, National Center of Crop 
Molecular Breeding, Huazhong Agricultural University, 430070, Wuhan, P.R. China.

Lycopene-epsilon-cyclase is one of the key enzymes related to alpha-carotene 
metabolism in plants. A full-length cDNA of 1300 bp encoding 
lycopene-epsilon-cyclase (Lyce) was generated from Cara Cara navel orange, a 
unique navel orange containing both lycopene and beta-carotene in its pulp, with 
little or no alpha-carotene. The gene had a 14 bp nucleotides deletion and 
caused a terminal mutation. DNA sequence corresponding to the deletion region 
revealed that two repeats of 6 bp (AGGTGT) were flanking the region in both Cara 
Cara and its original variety, Washington navel oranges, but a 2 bp (AT) 
insertion was only found in Cara Cara which explain the alternative splicing 
character of the gene.

DOI: 10.1007/s10529-005-5793-8
PMID: 16086259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Photosynth Res. 2001;70(1):53-71. doi: 10.1023/A:1013835924610.

The photosynthetic apparatus of Prochlorococcus: Insights through comparative 
genomics.

Hess WR(1), Rocap G, Ting CS, Larimer F, Stilwagen S, Lamerdin J, Chisholm SW.

Author information:
(1)Humboldt-University, Berlin, Germany.

Within the vast oceanic gyres, a significant fraction of the total chlorophyll 
belongs to the light-harvesting antenna systems of a single genus, 
Prochlorococcus. This organism, discovered only about 10 years ago, is an 
extremely small, Chl b-containing cyanobacterium that sometimes constitutes up 
to 50% of the photosynthetic biomass in the oceans. Various Prochlorococcus 
strains are known to have significantly different conditions for optimal growth 
and survival. Strains which dominate the surface waters, for example, have an 
irradiance optimum for photosynthesis of 200 mumol photons m(-2) s(-1), whereas 
those that dominate the deeper waters photosynthesize optimally at 30-50 mumol 
photons m(-2) s(-1). These high and low light adapted 'ecotypes' are very 
closely related - less than 3% divergent in their 16S rRNA sequences - inviting 
speculation as to what features of their photosynthetic mechanisms might account 
for the differences in photosynthetic performance. Here, we compare information 
obtained from the complete genome sequences of two Prochlorococcus strains, with 
special emphasis on genes for the photosynthetic apparatus. These two strains, 
Prochlorococcus MED4 and MIT 9313, are representatives of high- and low-light 
adapted ecotypes, characterized by their low or high Chl b/a ratio, 
respectively. Both genomes appear to be significantly smaller (1700 and 2400 
kbp) than those of other cyanobacteria, and the low-light-adapted strain has 
significantly more genes than its high light counterpart. In keeping with their 
comparative light-dependent physiologies, MED4 has many more genes encoding 
putative high-light-inducible proteins (HLIP) and photolyases to repair 
UV-induced DNA damage, whereas MIT 9313 possesses more genes associated with the 
photosynthetic apparatus. These include two pcb genes encoding Chl-binding 
proteins and a second copy of the gene psbA, encoding the Photosystem II 
reaction center protein D1. In addition, MIT 9313 contains a gene cluster to 
produce chromophorylated phycoerythrin. The latter represents an intermediate 
form between the phycobiliproteins of non-Chl b containing cyanobacteria and an 
extremely modified beta phycoerythrin as the sole derivative of 
phycobiliproteins still present in MED4. Intriguing features found in both 
Prochlorococcus strains include a gene cluster for Rubisco and carboxysomal 
proteins that is likely of non-cyanobacterial origin and two genes for a 
putative varepsilon and beta lycopene cyclase, respectively, explaining how 
Prochlorococcus may synthesize the alpha branch of carotenoids that are common 
in green organisms but not in other cyanobacteria.

DOI: 10.1023/A:1013835924610
PMID: 16228362


77. Arch Microbiol. 2005 Dec;184(4):207-14. doi: 10.1007/s00203-005-0004-5. Epub 
2005 Nov 15.

Carotenoid biosynthesis in Gloeobacter violaceus PCC4721 involves a single 
crtI-type phytoene desaturase instead of typical cyanobacterial enzymes.

Steiger S(1), Jackisch Y, Sandmann G.

Author information:
(1)Biosynthesis Group, Botanical Institute 213, J.W. Goethe University, P.O. Box 
111932, 60054 Frankfurt, Germany.

Gloeobacter violaceus is a cyanobacterium isolated from other groups by lack of 
thylakoids and unique structural features of its photosynthetic protein 
complexes. Carotenoid biosynthesis has been investigated with respect to the 
carotenoids formed and the genes and enzymes involved. Carotenoid analysis 
identified ss-carotene as major carotenoid and echinenone as a minor component. 
This composition is quite unique and the cellular amounts are up to 10-fold 
lower than in other unicellular cyanobacteria. Carotenoid biosynthesis is 
up-regulated in a light-dependent manner. This enhanced biosynthesis partially 
compensates for photooxidation especially of ss-carotene. The sequenced genome 
of G. violaceus was analyzed and several gene candidates homologous to 
carotenogenic genes from other organisms obtained. Functional expression of all 
candidates and complementation in Escherichia coli led to the identification of 
all genes involved in the biosynthesis of the G. violaceus carotenoids with the 
exception of the lycopene cyclase gene. An additional diketolase gene was found 
that functioned in E. coli but is silent in G. violaceus cells. The biggest 
difference from all other cyanobacteria is the existence of a single 
bacterial-type 4-step desaturase instead of the poly cis cyanobacterial 
desaturation pathway catalyzed by two cyanobacterial-type desaturases and an 
isomerase. The genes for these three enzymes are absent in G. violaceus.

DOI: 10.1007/s00203-005-0004-5
PMID: 16235086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1991 Nov;57(11):3378-82. doi: 
10.1128/aem.57.11.3378-3382.1991.

Gibberellins and Carotenoids in the Wild Type and Mutants of Gibberella 
fujikuroi.

Candau R(1), Avalos J, Cerdá-Olmedo E.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Genética y Biotecnia, Universidad de Sevilla, Seville, Spain.

A new screening procedure was used to isolate 14 gib mutants of Gibberella 
fujikuroi with modifications in the production of gibberellins. The production 
of carotenoids and gibberellins was investigated in the gib mutants and in 
representative car mutants with various modifications of carotenoid 
biosynthesis. The determinations of gibberellins were carried out with a 
simplified fluorescence method. One of the mutants lacked both gibberellins and 
carotenoids. In many mutants the two pathways compensated each other: an 
increase in the production of one group of compounds was accompanied by a 
decrease in the production of the other. Under certain conditions the 
compensation was quantitative when the output of the two pathways was measured 
in moles of the common precursor, geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate. alpha-Picoline, 
an inhibitor of lycopene cyclase in G. fujikuroi, inhibits gibberellin 
biosynthesis. Other agents that affect the accumulation of carotenoids have no 
noticeable effect on the accumulation of gibberellins; such is the case with 
diphenylamine and beta-ionone, two inhibitors of phytoene dehydrogenation, and 
visible light, which stimulates carotenogenesis.

DOI: 10.1128/aem.57.11.3378-3382.1991
PMCID: PMC183975
PMID: 16348593


79. J Plant Physiol. 2006 Mar;163(4):383-91. doi: 10.1016/j.jplph.2005.06.003.
Epub  2005 Sep 12.

Preferential inhibition of the lycopene epsilon-cyclase by the substituted 
triethylamine compound MPTA in higher plants.

Phillip DM(1), Young AJ.

Author information:
(1)School of Biological and Earth Sciences, Liverpool John Moores University, 
Byrom St., Liverpool L3 3AF, UK. d.m.phillip@livjm.ac.uk

In addition to the usual complement of carotenoids found in the plant leaf 
tissues, lettuce (Lactuca sativa), unusually, possesses large amounts of the 
diol lactucaxanthin. This carotenoid possesses two epsilon-end-groups and its 
presence provides a good model in which to study the effects of the substituted 
triethylamine compound 2-(4-methylphenoxy)triethylamine (MPTA) on the 
cyclisation of beta- and epsilon-end-groups during the biosynthesis of 
carotenoids. Treatment with 10 or 20microM MPTA significantly reduced levels of 
both beta-carotene and neoxanthin (up to 18-fold), whilst levels of violaxanthin 
and lutein were less affected (4-fold reduction). In contrast, levels of 
lactucaxanthin were not reduced even at the highest inhibitor concentration, and 
at 10microM MPTA levels of this xanthophyll doubled. The pigment stoichiometry 
of the bulk light-harvesting complex (LHCIIb) isolated from treated plants shows 
that lactucaxanthin successfully substituted for lutein and neoxanthin in two of 
the xanthophyll binding sites, namely L2 and N1. Inhibition of cyclisation was 
accompanied by the accumulation of lycopene and trace amounts of delta-carotene 
and a number of oxygenated derivatives of these precursors. Two forms of 
mono-hydroxy lycopene were identified together with mono-epoxy delta-carotene.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jplph.2005.06.003
PMID: 16455351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Zhi Wu Sheng Li Yu Fen Zi Sheng Wu Xue Xue Bao. 2006 Feb;32(1):31-6.

Fruit coloration difference between Fengwan, a late-maturing mutant and its 
original cultivar Fengjie72-1 of navel orange (Citrus sinensis Osbeck).

Liu YZ(1), Tang P, Tao NG, Xu Q, Peng SA, Deng XX, Xiang KS, Huang RH.

Author information:
(1)National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, College of Horticulture 
and Forestry, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China.

Fruit color is one of the most important external quality traits. Mutants with 
different color are useful for the study of regulating mechanism of coloration 
progress. A novel mutant, Fengwan, derived from Fengjie72-1 navel orange (Citrus 
sinensis L. Osbeck), has the distinctive characteristic of the coloration delay 
of 30 d or so, with the change in total soluble solid (TSS) and the ratio of 
TSS/acidity. In order to understand the mechanism underlying the difference of 
coloration between the mutant and the parental variety, the chlorophyll and 
carotenoid contents in the peel of two cultivars at different maturation stages 
were analyzed. The expression of genes responsible for some carotenoid 
biosynthetic enzymes (phytoene synthase, phytoene desaturase, zeta-carotene 
desaturase, beta-lycopene cyclase, beta-carotene hydroxylase) and chlorophyllase 
using the RT-PCR technique were also studied. The distinct decrease of 
chlorophyll in the peel of Fengwan navel orange occurred from early November to 
late November, about three weeks later than that of its original cultivar. 
Obvious accumulation of carotenoid in the peel of the mutant began on Dec.12, 
while that of the original cultivar began on Nov. 3. Analysis of 
independent-samples t-test showed that the chlorophyll content of the peel of 
Fengwan navel orange from October to November was significantly higher, and the 
carotenoid content from December to January was significantly lower than that in 
the peel of the parental line, Fengjie72-1 navel orange. The expression of 
chlorophyllase gene in the peel of Fengwan navel orange reached a maximum in 
January and kept at a slightly lower level from October to December than that of 
Fengjie 72-1 orange, while the time of gene expression about some carotenoid 
biosynthetic enzymes reaching a maximum in the peel of the mutant were one month 
later than that of the original cultivar.

PMID: 16477128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol. 2006 Jul;33(7):552-9. doi: 
10.1007/s10295-006-0121-4. Epub 2006 Apr 12.

Structural diversity and functional novelty of new carotenoid biosynthesis 
genes.

Cheng Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Biological and Chemical Sciences and Engineering, Central Research and 
Development, E. I. DuPont de Nemours Inc., Experimental Station, E328/B48, 
Wilmington, DE 19880-0328, USA. qiong.cheng@usa.dupont.com

Many new carotenoid synthesis genes have recently been identified through 
genomic sequencing or functional cloning. Some of them exhibit novel structures 
and/or novel functions. This review describes such examples in the families of 
lycopene beta-cyclases, putative homologues of phytoene dehydrogenases and new 
carotenoid hydroxylases. Both the functionally novel lycopene beta-monocyclases 
and structurally novel fusion-type of lycopene beta-cyclases were described. 
Another newly discovered sequence of lycopene beta-cyclase described might 
represent a new class of lycopene beta-cyclases previously not identified in 
several cyanobacteria. Three examples of putative homologues of phytoene 
dehydrogenases were described, however, they were confirmed to encode different 
and/or new functions such as beta-carotene ketolase, 4,4'-diapolycopene 
oxygenase or prolycopene isomerase. Two new carotenoid hydroxylase genes were 
described that encoded the new function of 2,2'-beta-ionone ring hydroxylase or 
3,3'-isorenieratene hydroxylase. Phylogenetic analysis of these genes shed light 
on their possible evolutionary origins. These new genes also provide tools for 
synthesis of novel and desirable carotenoids by genetic engineering.

DOI: 10.1007/s10295-006-0121-4
PMID: 16609853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Bacteriol. 2006 May;188(9):3337-44. doi: 10.1128/JB.188.9.3337-3344.2006.

Sll0254 (CrtL(diox)) is a bifunctional lycopene cyclase/dioxygenase in 
cyanobacteria producing myxoxanthophyll.

Mohamed HE(1), Vermaas WF.

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, P.O. Box 874501, Tempe, 
Arizona 85287-4501, USA.

Upon depletion of Sll0254 in Synechocystis sp. strain PCC 6803, cyclized 
carotenoids were replaced by linear, relatively hydrophilic carotenoids, and the 
amount of the two photosystems decreased greatly. Full segregants of the sll0254 
deletion in Synechocystis were not obtained, implying that this gene is 
essential for survival, most likely to allow normal cell division. The 
N-terminal half of Sll0254 has limited similarity to the family of lycopene 
cyclases, has an additional dehydrogenase motif near the N terminus, and is 
followed by a Rieske 2Fe-2S center sequence signature. To test whether Sll0254 
serves as a lycopene cyclase in Synechocystis, the corresponding gene was 
expressed in Escherichia coli strains that can produce lycopene or neurosporene. 
In the presence of Sll0254 these linear carotenoids were converted into 
cyclized, relatively hydrophilic pigments, with masses consistent with the 
introduction of two hydroxyl groups and with spectra indicative of only small 
changes in the number of conjugated double bonds. This suggests that Sll0254 
catalyzes formation of oxygenated, cyclized carotenoids. We interpret the 
appearance of the hydroxyl groups in the carotenoids to be due to dioxygenase 
activity involving the Rieske 2Fe-2S center and the additional dehydrogenase 
domain. This dioxygenase activity is required in the myxoxanthophyll 
biosynthesis pathway, after or concomitant with cyclization on the other end of 
the molecule. We interpret Sll0254 to be a dual-function enzyme with both 
lycopene cyclase and dioxygenase activity and have named it CrtL(diox).

DOI: 10.1128/JB.188.9.3337-3344.2006
PMCID: PMC1447463
PMID: 16621828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Mol Genet Genomics. 2006 Jul;276(1):79-86. doi: 10.1007/s00438-006-0121-0.
Epub  2006 Apr 20.

A carotenoid synthesis gene cluster from Algoriphagus sp. KK10202C with a novel 
fusion-type lycopene beta-cyclase gene.

Tao L(1), Yao H, Kasai H, Misawa N, Cheng Q.

Author information:
(1)Biological and Chemical Sciences and Engineering, Central Research and 
Development, E. I. DuPont. de Nemours Inc., Experimental Station, E328/B48, 
Wilmington, DE 19880-0328, USA.

A carotenoid synthesis gene cluster was isolated from a marine bacterium 
Algoriphagus sp. strain KK10202C that synthesized flexixanthin. Seven genes were 
transcribed in the same direction, among which five of them were involved in 
carotenoid synthesis. This cluster had a unique gene organization, with an 
isoprenoid gene, ispH (previously named lytB), being present among the 
carotenoid synthesis genes. The lycopene beta-cyclase encoded by the crtY ( cd ) 
gene appeared to be a fusion of bacterial heterodimeric lycopene cyclase CrtY(c) 
and CrtY(d). This was the first time that a fusion-type of lycopene beta-cyclase 
was reported in eubacteria. Heterologous expression of the Algoriphagus crtY ( 
cd ) gene in lycopene-accumulating Escherichia coli produced bicyclic 
beta-carotene. A biosynthesis pathway for monocyclic flexixanthin was proposed 
in Algoriphagus sp. strain KK10202C, though several of the carotenoid synthesis 
genes not linked with the cluster have not yet been cloned.

DOI: 10.1007/s00438-006-0121-0
PMID: 16625353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Plant Physiol. 1986 Jan;80(1):172-4. doi: 10.1104/pp.80.1.172.

Demonstration and solubilization of lycopene cyclase from capsicum chromoplast 
membranes.

Camara B(1), Dogbo O.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Régulations Métaboliques et Differenciation des Plastes, Tour 
53, Université Pierre et Marie Curie (Paris 6), 75230 Paris Cédex 05, France.

The conversion of phytoene into beta-carotene was demonstrated previously in 
chromoplast membranes prepared from Capsicum fruits (B. Camara et al. 1982 Eur J 
Biochem 127: 255-258). The direct cyclization of lycopene into beta-carotene and 
the successful solubilization of the enzymic activity involved in this reaction 
is reported.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.80.1.172
PMCID: PMC1075077
PMID: 16664576


85. Genes Genet Syst. 2006 Apr;81(2):103-13. doi: 10.1266/ggs.81.103.

Contrasting patterns of DNA variation in natural populations of two related 
conifers, Cryptomeria japonica and Taxodium distichum (Cupressaceae sensu lato).

Kado T(1), Ushio Y, Yoshimaru H, Tsumura Y, Tachida H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, 
Japan.

We investigated DNA variation within and between two closely related conifers, 
Cryptomeria japonica and Taxodium distichum, at nuclear loci encoding 
ferredoxin, glutamyl-tRNA reductase, lycopene beta cyclase, and 
phosphoribosylanthranilate transferase. Average nucleotide diversity at silent 
sites was estimated to be 0.0035 (SE 0.0012) in C. japonica and 0.0058 (SE 
0.0006) in T. distichum. One population in C. japonica was differentiated from 
the others but generally there was not much differentiation among populations or 
varieties within the two species. However, the two species seemed to differ in 
frequency spectra of DNA polymorphisms. Excesses of intermediate-frequency 
variants were found in C. japonica, whereas excesses of both rare and 
high-frequency variants were found in T. distichum, which suggested different 
histories of population structures in the two species. Deviations from the 
standard neutral expectations in DNA polymorphisms were found by applications of 
neutrality tests. The results show that actions of selection to respective loci 
seem to differ between the two species, indicating differences of interaction 
among evolutionary factors.

DOI: 10.1266/ggs.81.103
PMID: 16755134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


86. BMC Plant Biol. 2006 Jun 26;6:13. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-6-13.

Metabolic engineering of potato tuber carotenoids through tuber-specific 
silencing of lycopene epsilon cyclase.

Diretto G(1), Tavazza R, Welsch R, Pizzichini D, Mourgues F, Papacchioli V, 
Beyer P, Giuliano G.

Author information:
(1)ENEA, Casaccia Research Center, PO Box 2400, Roma 00100AD, Italy. 
gianfranco.diretto@casaccia.enea.it

BACKGROUND: Potato is a major staple food, and modification of its provitamin 
content is a possible means for alleviating nutritional deficiencies. 
beta-carotene is the main dietary precursor of vitamin A. Potato tubers contain 
low levels of carotenoids, composed mainly of the xanthophylls lutein, 
antheraxanthin, violaxanthin, and of xanthophyll esters. None of these 
carotenoids have provitamin A activity.
RESULTS: We silenced the first dedicated step in the beta-epsilon- branch of 
carotenoid biosynthesis, lycopene epsilon cyclase (LCY-e), by introducing, via 
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation, an antisense fragment of this gene under 
the control of the patatin promoter. Real Time measurements confirmed the 
tuber-specific silencing of Lcy-e. Antisense tubers showed significant increases 
in beta-beta-carotenoid levels, with beta-carotene showing the maximum increase 
(up to 14-fold). Total carotenoids increased up to 2.5-fold. These changes were 
not accompanied by a decrease in lutein, suggesting that LCY-e is not 
rate-limiting for lutein accumulation. Tuber-specific changes in expression of 
several genes in the pathway were observed.
CONCLUSION: The data suggest that epsilon-cyclization of lycopene is a key 
regulatory step in potato tuber carotenogenesis. Upon tuber-specific silencing 
of the corresponding gene, beta-beta-carotenoid and total carotenoid levels are 
increased, and expression of several other genes in the pathway is modified.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2229-6-13
PMCID: PMC1570464
PMID: 16800876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Cell Res. 2006 Aug;16(8):731-9. doi: 10.1038/sj.cr.7310081.

Tissue differential expression of lycopene beta-cyclase gene in papaya.

Skelton RL(1), Yu Q, Srinivasan R, Manshardt R, Moore PH, Ming R.

Author information:
(1)Hawaii Agriculture Research Center, Aiea, HI 96701, USA.

Carotene pigments in flowers and fruits are distinct features related to fitness 
advantages such as attracting insects for pollination and birds for seed 
dispersal. In papaya, the flesh color of the fruit is considered a quality trait 
that correlates with nutritional value and is linked to shelf-life of the fruit. 
To elucidate the carotenoid biosynthesis pathway in papaya, we took a candidate 
gene approach to clone the lycopene beta-cyclase gene, LCY-B. A papaya LCY-B 
ortholog, cpLCY-B, was successfully identified from both cDNA and bacterial 
artificial chromosome (BAC) libraries and complete genomic sequence was obtained 
from the positive BAC including the promoter region. This cpLCY-B shared 80% 
amino acid identity with citrus LCY-B. However, full genomic sequences from both 
yellow- and red-fleshed papaya were identical. Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) 
revealed similar levels of expression at six different maturing stages of fruits 
for both yellow- and red-fleshed genotypes. Further expression analyses of 
cpLCY-B showed that its expression levels were seven- and three-fold higher in 
leaves and, respectively, flowers than in fruits, suggesting that cpLCY-B is 
down-regulated during the fruit ripening process.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.cr.7310081
PMID: 16801954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Sep;1761(9):1085-92. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbalip.2006.06.002. Epub 2006 Jul 1.

The biotechnological potential of the al-2 gene from Neurospora [correction of 
Neurospra] crassa for the production of monocyclic keto hydroxy carotenoids.

Sandmann G(1), Zhu C, Krubasik P, Fraser PD.

Author information:
(1)Biosynthesis Group, Molecular Biosciences 213, J.W. Goethe Universität, P.O. 
Box 111932, D-60054 Frankfurt, Germany. Sandmann@em.uni-frankfurt.de

The al-2 cDNA from Neurospora crassa was cloned, expressed and functionally 
characterized. The enzyme comprised the two catalytic activities of a phytoene 
synthase and a lycopene cyclase. In contrast to most other lycopene cyclases, 
single cyclizations were preferentially catalyzed. This N. crassa enzyme is the 
first CrtYB-type monocyclic-acting lycopene cyclase. Therefore, this cDNA has 
been evaluated for the heterologous synthesis of monocyclic hydroxy-keto 
carotenoids by combination with other carotenogenic genes in Escherichia coli. 
Depending on the degree of desaturation, 4-keto derivatives of gamma-carotene 
and torulene with additional 2-hydroxy, 3-hydroxy and/or 1'-HO groups were 
generated and the following asymmetrical carotenoids identified and quantitated: 
3-HO-4-keto-gamma-carotene, 2-HO-4-keto-gamma-carotene, 
4-keto-1'-HO-gamma-carotene, 3,1'-(HO)(2)-4-keto-gamma-carotene, 
3-HO-4-keto-torulene and 2-HO-4-keto-torulene. Among them all the monocyclic 
gamma-carotene derivatives with 9 conjugated double bonds were not found 
naturally before. Furthermore, 2-HO-4-keto-torulene with 10 conjugated double 
bonds is another novel carotenoid.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2006.06.002
PMID: 16928467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Planta. 2007 Mar;225(4):1019-29. doi: 10.1007/s00425-006-0409-7.

Inhibition of lycopene cyclase results in accumulation of chlorophyll 
precursors.

La Rocca N(1), Rascio N, Oster U, Rüdiger W.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia, Università di Padova, Via U. Bassi 58/B, 35131 
Padova, Italy.

Free porphyrins and their magnesium complexes, including chlorophylls, are 
potent photo-sensitizers. Plants usually accumulate these compounds bound to 
proteins together with protective compounds like carotenoids. Besides their 
protective role, carotenoids can play a structural role in these complexes. To 
analyze the effect of impaired carotenogenesis on plastid membranes we applied 
to barley seedlings the bleaching herbicide 2-(4-chlorophenylthio)triethylamine 
(CPTA) as a specific inhibitor for the cyclization of lycopene. To avoid 
interference with photo-oxidation, the essential experiments were performed on 
seedlings grown in darkness. While the amount of total carotenoids decreased, we 
found accumulation of more 6-carotene than lycopene in darkness clearly showing 
that CPTA inhibits the lycopene beta-cyclase more effectively than the lycopene 
epsilon-cyclase. The CPTA treatment resulted in accumulation of non-photoactive 
protochlorophyllide a; the amount of photoactive protochlorophyllide and 
NADPH:protochlorophyllide oxidoreductase remained constant. Further, the level 
of Mg protophorphyrin and its monomethyl ester increased to an extent similar to 
that obtained by application of 5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA). The perturbation of 
the ultrastructure of etioplast inner membranes, observed after CPTA-treatment, 
was not found after ALA-treatment; this excluded the accumulated tetrapyrroles 
as responsible for the perturbation. By contrast, the down-regulation of Lhcb 
and RbcS genes found after CPTA-treatment was compatible with the presumed role 
of Mg protophorphyrin as "plastid signal" for regulation of nuclear gene 
expression. Possible mechanisms for enhancement of tetrapyrrole accumulation by 
non-cyclic carotenoids are discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s00425-006-0409-7
PMID: 17039370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Plant Cell Environ. 2006 Mar;29(3):435-45. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-3040.2005.01492.x.

Carotenoid accumulation and function in seeds and non-green tissues.

Howitt CA(1), Pogson BJ.

Author information:
(1)CSIRO Plant Industry, GPO Box 1600, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia.

Carotenoids are plant pigments that function as antioxidants, hormone 
precursors, colourants and essential components of the photosynthetic apparatus. 
Carotenoids accumulate in nearly all types of plastids, not just the 
chloroplast, and are thus found in most plant organs and tissues, albeit at 
trace levels in some tissues. In this review we summarise the current knowledge 
of the carotenoid content of non-green plastids and discuss what is known about 
the regulation of their biosynthesis in roots, fruits, flowers, tubers and 
seeds. The emphasis is on food crops as carotenoids are essential components of 
human diets, primarily as some are precursors of vitamin A. The low carotenoid 
content of many staple foods, such as cereals, can exacerbate dietary 
deficiencies. The World Health Organisation has estimated that more than 100 
million children are vitamin A-deficient and up to 500,000 of these children 
become blind each year. Many of these children die within 12 months of going 
blind. Thus, understanding the regulation of carotenoid accumulation in food 
crops, especially tubers and cereals, should facilitate improvements to 
nutritional value with potentially significant health benefits.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3040.2005.01492.x
PMID: 17080597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Eukaryot Cell. 2007 Mar;6(3):533-45. doi: 10.1128/EC.00265-06. Epub 2006 Nov
3.

Carotenoid biosynthesis in the primitive red alga Cyanidioschyzon merolae.

Cunningham FX Jr(1), Lee H, Gantt E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics, Microbiology Building, 
Room 2202, Campus Drive, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USa. 
BuddyX@umd.edu

Cyanidioschyzon merolae is considered to be one of the most primitive of 
eukaryotic photosynthetic organisms. To obtain insights into the origin and 
evolution of the pathway of carotenoid biosynthesis in eukaryotic plants, the 
carotenoid content of C. merolae was ascertained, genes encoding enzymes of 
carotenoid biosynthesis in this unicellular red alga were identified, and the 
activities of two candidate pathway enzymes of particular interest, lycopene 
cyclase and beta-carotene hydroxylase, were examined. C. merolae contains 
perhaps the simplest assortment of chlorophylls and carotenoids found in any 
eukaryotic photosynthetic organism: chlorophyll a, beta-carotene, and 
zeaxanthin. Carotenoids with epsilon-rings (e.g., lutein), found in many other 
red algae and in green algae and land plants, were not detected, and the 
lycopene cyclase of C. merolae quite specifically produced only beta-ringed 
carotenoids when provided with lycopene as the substrate in Escherichia coli. 
Lycopene beta-ring cyclases from several bacteria, cyanobacteria, and land 
plants also proved to be high-fidelity enzymes, whereas the structurally related 
epsilon-ring cyclases from several plant species were found to be less specific, 
yielding products with beta-rings as well as epsilon-rings. C. merolae lacks 
orthologs of genes that encode the two types of beta-carotene hydroxylase found 
in land plants, one a nonheme diiron oxygenase and the other a cytochrome P450. 
A C. merolae chloroplast gene specifies a polypeptide similar to members of a 
third class of beta-carotene hydroxylases, common in cyanobacteria, but this 
gene did not produce an active enzyme when expressed in E. coli. The identity of 
the C. merolae beta-carotene hydroxylase therefore remains uncertain.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.00265-06
PMCID: PMC1828917
PMID: 17085635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Transgenic Res. 2007 Feb;16(1):15-28. doi: 10.1007/s11248-006-9025-3. Epub
2006  Nov 10.

Agronomic performance and transcriptional analysis of carotenoid biosynthesis in 
fruits of transgenic HighCaro and control tomato lines under field conditions.

Giorio G(1), Stigliani AL, D'Ambrosio C.

Author information:
(1)Metapontum Agrobios, S.S. Jonica 106, Km 448.2, Metaponto, MT , 75010, Italy. 
ggiorio@agrobios.it

Genetic manipulation of carotenoid biosynthesis in higher plants has been the 
objective of a number of biotechnology programs, e.g. the Golden Rice Program. 
However, tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.), which naturally accumulates lycopene 
in fruits, has attracted the attention of many groups who have manipulated it to 
increase or diversify carotenoid accumulation. One of the most significant 
achievements was "HighCaro (HC)," a transgenic tomato plant constitutively 
expressing the tomato lycopene beta-cyclase (tLcy-b), that produces orange 
fruits due to the complete conversion of lycopene to beta-carotene. In this 
article we report the results of a field trial conducted in Metaponto (Italy) on 
HC and on two control genotypes to evaluate the stability of the transgenic 
trait and their yield performances. Transcriptional regulation of eight genes 
involved in carotenogenesis was assayed by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) 
analysis on fruits collected at four distinct development stages. Statistical 
analysis results demonstrated that in field conditions the transgene maintained 
its ability to induce the conversion of lycopene to beta-carotene. Moreover, 
agronomic performances and fruit quality in the transgenic line were not 
impaired by this metabolic disturbance. Results of qRT-PCR analysis suggested 
that transcription of PSY-1, PDS and ZDS genes were developmentally regulated in 
both genotypes. Unexpectedly, Lcy-b expression in transgenic fruits was also 
developmentally regulated, despite the fact that the gene was driven by a 
constitutive promoter. Our data provide evidence that in photosynthetic cells a 
strict and aspecific mechanism controls the level of transcripts until the onset 
of chromoplasts differentiation, at which point a gene-specific control on 
transcription takes place.

DOI: 10.1007/s11248-006-9025-3
PMCID: PMC2734263
PMID: 17096211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


93. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2006 Dec;265(1):69-75. doi: 
10.1111/j.1574-6968.2006.00471.x.

Astaxanthin formation in the marine photosynthetic bacterium Rhodovulum 
sulfidophilum expressing crtI, crtY, crtW and crtZ.

Mukoyama D(1), Takeyama H, Kondo Y, Matsunaga T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, 
Koganei, Tokyo, Japan.

This study reports the production of astaxanthin in the photosynthetic bacterium 
Rhodovulum sulfidophilum, which has adequate precursor pools and storage 
capabilities for heterologous carotenoid production. Chemical mutagenesis was 
carried out using ethylmethane sulfonate to produce mutants with a modified 
carotenoid biosynthesis pathway downstream of phytoene. Stable green- and 
gray-colored mutants were selected. Green mutants contained neurosporene or 
chloroxanthin as their major carotenoid (>90%), while the gray mutants 
accumulated phytoene. We previously demonstrated the production of beta-carotene 
in Rhodovulum sulfidophilum by cloning the Erythrobacter longus crtI (phytoene 
dehydrogenase) and crtY (lycopene cyclase) genes. In the present study, an 
expression vector for astaxanthin production was constructed that contained the 
Paracoccus crtW (beta-carotene oxygenase) and crtZ (beta-carotene hydroxylase) 
genes in addition to the E. longus crtI and crtY genes. A transconjugant, which 
can synthesize astaxanthin, was successfully generated (2.0 microg g(-1) DCW).

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2006.00471.x
PMID: 17107420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Genetics. 2007 Mar;175(3):981-92. doi: 10.1534/genetics.106.066837. Epub 2006
 Dec 6.

Generating novel allelic variation through Activator insertional mutagenesis in 
maize.

Bai L(1), Singh M, Pitt L, Sweeney M, Brutnell TP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.

The maize transposable element Activator (Ac) has been exploited as an 
insertional mutagen to disrupt, clone, and characterize genes in a number of 
plant species. To develop an Ac-based mutagenesis platform for maize, a 
large-scale mutagenesis was conducted targeting the pink scutellum1 locus. We 
selected 1092 Ac transposition events from a closely linked donor Ac, resulting 
in the recovery of 17 novel ps1 alleles. Multiple phenotypic classes were 
identified corresponding to Ac insertions in the 5'-UTR and coding region of the 
predicted Ps1 gene. To generate a stable allelic series, we employed genetic 
screens and identified 83 germinally heritable ps1 excision alleles. Molecular 
characterization of these excision alleles revealed a position-dependent bias in 
excision allele frequencies and the predominance of 7- and 8-bp footprint 
products. In total, 19 unique ps1 excision alleles were generated in this study, 
including several that resulted in weak mutant phenotypes. The analysis of 
footprint alleles suggests a model of Ac excision in maize that is consistent 
with recent in vitro studies of hAT element excision. Importantly, the genetic 
and molecular methods developed in this study can be extended to generate novel 
allelic variation at any Ac-tagged gene in the genome.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.106.066837
PMCID: PMC1840078
PMID: 17151236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Plant J. 2007 Feb;49(4):619-28. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02982.x. Epub
2007  Jan 8.

Dissecting the biosynthetic pathway for the bypass1 root-derived signal.

Van Norman JM(1), Sieburth LE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

The Arabidopsis BYPASS1 (BPS1) gene is required for normal root and shoot 
development. In bps1 mutants, grafting and root excision experiments have shown 
that mutant roots produce a transmissible signal that is capable of arresting 
shoot development. In addition, we previously showed that growth of bps1 mutants 
on the carotenoid biosynthesis inhibitor fluridone resulted in partial rescue of 
both leaf and root defects. These observations suggest that a single mobile 
carotenoid-derived signal affects both root and shoot development. Here, we 
describe further characterization of the bps1 root-derived signal using genetic 
and biosynthetic inhibitor approaches. We characterized leaf and root 
development in double mutants that combined the bps1 mutant with mutants that 
have known defects in genes encoding carotenoid processing enzymes or defects in 
responses to carotenoid-derived abscisic acid. Our studies indicate that the 
mobile signal is neither abscisic acid nor the MAX-dependent hormone that 
regulates shoot branching, and that production of the signal does not require 
the activity of any single carotenoid cleavage dioxygenase. In addition, our 
studies with CPTA, a lycopene cyclase inhibitor, show that signal production 
requires synthesis of beta-carotene and its derivatives. Furthermore, we show a 
direct requirement for carotenoids as signal precursors, as the GUN 
plastid-to-nucleus signaling pathway is not required for phenotypic rescue. 
Together, our results suggest that bps1 roots produce a novel mobile 
carotenoid-derived signaling compound.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02982.x
PMID: 17217459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Plant J. 2007 Jan;49(2):276-88. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02960.x.

Contained metabolic engineering in tomatoes by expression of carotenoid 
biosynthesis genes from the plastid genome.

Wurbs D(1), Ruf S, Bock R.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie (MPI-MP), Am 
Mühlenberg 1, D-14476 Potsdam-Golm, Germany.

Applications of chloroplast engineering in agriculture and biotechnology will 
depend critically on success in extending the crop range of chloroplast 
transformation, and on the feasibility of expressing transgenes in edible organs 
(such as tubers and fruits), which often are not green and thus are much less 
active in chloroplast gene expression. We have improved a recently developed 
chloroplast-transformation system for tomato plants and applied it to 
engineering one of the central metabolic pathways in fruits: carotenoid 
biosynthesis. We report that plastid expression of a bacterial lycopene 
beta-cyclase gene results in herbicide resistance and triggers conversion of 
lycopene, the main storage carotenoid of tomatoes, to beta-carotene, resulting 
in fourfold enhanced pro-vitamin A content of the fruits. Our results 
demonstrate the feasibility of engineering nutritionally important biochemical 
pathways in non-green plastids by transformation of the chloroplast genome.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02960.x
PMID: 17241450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Biotechnol Adv. 2007 May-Jun;25(3):211-22. doi: 
10.1016/j.biotechadv.2006.12.001. Epub 2006 Dec 19.

Progress on molecular breeding and metabolic engineering of biosynthesis 
pathways of C(30), C(35), C(40), C(45), C(50) carotenoids.

Wang F(1), Jiang JG, Chen Q.

Author information:
(1)College of Food and Bioengineering, South China University of Technology, 
Guangzhou, PR China.

At least 700 natural carotenoids have been characterized; they can be classified 
into C(30), C(40) and C(50) subfamilies. The first step of C(40) pathway is the 
combination of two molecules of geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate to synthesize 
phytoene by phytoene synthase (CrtB or PSY). Most natural carotenoids originate 
from different types and levels of desaturation by phytoene desaturase (CrtI or 
PDS+ZDS), cyclization by lycopene cyclase (CrtY or LYC) and other modifications 
by different modifying enzyme (CrtA, CrtU, CrtZ or BCH, CrtX, CrtO, etc.) of 
this C(40) backbone. The first step of C(30) pathway is the combination of two 
molecules of FDP to synthesize diapophytoene by diapophytoene synthase (CrtM). 
But natural C(30) pathway only goes through a few steps of desaturation to form 
diaponeurosporene by diapophytoene desaturase (CrtN). Natural C(50) carotenoid 
decaprenoxanthin is synthesized starting from the C(40) carotenoid lycopene by 
the addition of 2 C(5) units. Concerned the importance of carotenoids, more and 
more attention has been concentrated on achieving novel carotenoids. The method 
being used successfully is to construct carotenoids biosynthesis pathways by 
metabolic engineering. The strategy of metabolic engineering is to engineer a 
small number of stringent upstream enzymes (CrtB, CrtI, CrtY, CrtM, or CrtN), 
then use a lot of promiscuous downstream enzymes to obtain large number of novel 
carotenoids. Two key enzymes phytoene desaturase (CrtI(m)) and lycopene cyclase 
(CrtY(m)) have been modified and used with a series of downstream modifying 
enzymes with broad substrate specificity, such as monooxygenase (CrtA), carotene 
desaturase (CrtU), carotene hydroxylase (CrtZ), zeaxanthin glycosylase (CrtX) 
and carotene ketolase (CrtO) to extend successfully natural C(30) and C(40) 
pathways in E. coli. Existing C(30) synthase CrtM to synthesize carotenoids with 
different chain length have been engineered and a series of novel carotenoids 
have been achieved using downstream modifying enzymes. C(35) carotenoid 
biosynthesis pathway has been constructed in E. coli as described. C(45) and 
C(50) carotenoid biosynthesis pathways have also been constructed in E. coli, 
but it is still necessary to extend these two pathways. Those novel acyclic or 
cyclic carotenoids have a potential ability to protect against photooxidation 
and radical-mediated peroxidation reactions which makes them interesting 
pharmaceutical candidates.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2006.12.001
PMID: 17257797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2007 Jun;75(4):879-87. doi: 
10.1007/s00253-007-0876-1. Epub 2007 Feb 23.

Differential expression of carotenogenic genes and associated changes in pigment 
profile during regeneration of Haematococcus pluvialis cysts.

Vidhyavathi R(1), Venkatachalam L, Kamath BS, Sarada R, Ravishankar GA.

Author information:
(1)Plant Cell Biotechnology Department, Central Food Technological Research 
Institute, Mysore 570 020, India. sarada_ravi@yahoo.com

Haematococcus pluvialis is a green alga known to accumulate astaxanthin in 
extra-plastidic lipid vesicles under stress conditions. The present study 
revealed the influence of few cultural parameters and temperature treatments on 
regeneration efficiency of red cysts along with changes in pigment profile and 
expression of carotenogenic genes during regeneration. Regeneration efficiency 
has been improved by incubating less aged cyst cells in a medium containing 
ammonium carbonate, 16:8 light-dark cycle with a light intensity of 30 mumol 
m(-2) s(-1). During regeneration, there was a decrease in total astaxanthin, 
total carotenoids, and carotenoid to chlorophyll ratio, and increase in 
beta-carotene, lutein, total chlorophyll, and chlorophyll a to b ratio. 
Expression analysis revealed the presence of transcripts of carotenogenic genes, 
phytoene synthase (PSY), phytoene desaturase (PDS), lycopene cyclase (LCY), 
beta-carotene ketolase (BKT), and beta-carotene hydroxylase (CHY) in cyst cells, 
and these transcripts were up regulated transiently upon transfer to favorable 
conditions. As the culture growth progressed, carotenogenic gene expressions 
were decreased and reached basal expression levels of green motile vegetative 
cells. In addition, this is the first report of detection of carotenogenic gene 
transcripts in red cysts, and their differential expression during regeneration. 
The present study suggests the use of red cysts as alternate inoculum for mass 
cultivation to combat protozoan predation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-007-0876-1
PMID: 17318532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


99. PLoS One. 2007 Apr 4;2(4):e350. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0000350.

Metabolic engineering of potato carotenoid content through tuber-specific 
overexpression of a bacterial mini-pathway.

Diretto G(1), Al-Babili S, Tavazza R, Papacchioli V, Beyer P, Giuliano G.

Author information:
(1)Ente per le Nuove Tecnologie, l'Energia e l'Ambiente (ENEA), Casaccia 
Research Center, Roma, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Since the creation of "Golden Rice", biofortification of 
plant-derived foods is a promising strategy for the alleviation of nutritional 
deficiencies. Potato is the most important staple food for mankind after the 
cereals rice, wheat and maize, and is extremely poor in provitamin A 
carotenoids.
METHODOLOGY: We transformed potato with a mini-pathway of bacterial origin, 
driving the synthesis of beta-carotene (Provitamin A) from geranylgeranyl 
diphosphate. Three genes, encoding phytoene synthase (CrtB), phytoene desaturase 
(CrtI) and lycopene beta-cyclase (CrtY) from Erwinia, under tuber-specific or 
constitutive promoter control, were used. 86 independent transgenic lines, 
containing six different promoter/gene combinations, were produced and analyzed. 
Extensive regulatory effects on the expression of endogenous genes for 
carotenoid biosynthesis are observed in transgenic lines. Constitutive 
expression of the CrtY and/or CrtI genes interferes with the establishment of 
transgenosis and with the accumulation of leaf carotenoids. Expression of all 
three genes, under tuber-specific promoter control, results in tubers with a 
deep yellow ("golden") phenotype without any adverse leaf phenotypes. In these 
tubers, carotenoids increase approx. 20-fold, to 114 mcg/g dry weight and 
beta-carotene 3600-fold, to 47 mcg/g dry weight.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the highest carotenoid and beta-carotene content reported 
for biofortified potato as well as for any of the four major staple foods (the 
next best event being "Golden Rice 2", with 31 mcg/g dry weight beta-carotene). 
Assuming a beta-carotene to retinol conversion of 6ratio1, this is sufficient to 
provide 50% of the Recommended Daily Allowance of Vitamin A with 250 gms (fresh 
weight) of "golden" potatoes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0000350
PMCID: PMC1831493
PMID: 17406674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


100. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2007 Jul;73(13):4342-50. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02759-06.
Epub  2007 May 11.

High-level production of beta-carotene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by successive 
transformation with carotenogenic genes from Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous.

Verwaal R(1), Wang J, Meijnen JP, Visser H, Sandmann G, van den Berg JA, van 
Ooyen AJ.

Author information:
(1)Fungal Genomics, Laboratory of Microbiology, Wageningen University, 
Dreijenlaan 2, Wageningen, The Netherlands.

To determine whether Saccharomyces cerevisiae can serve as a host for efficient 
carotenoid and especially beta-carotene production, carotenogenic genes from the 
carotenoid-producing yeast Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous were introduced and 
overexpressed in S. cerevisiae. Because overexpression of these genes from an 
episomal expression vector resulted in unstable strains, the genes were 
integrated into genomic DNA to yield stable, carotenoid-producing S. cerevisiae 
cells. Furthermore, carotenoid production levels were higher in strains 
containing integrated carotenogenic genes. Overexpression of crtYB (which 
encodes a bifunctional phytoene synthase and lycopene cyclase) and crtI 
(phytoene desaturase) from X. dendrorhous was sufficient to enable carotenoid 
production. Carotenoid production levels were increased by additional 
overexpression of a homologous geranylgeranyl diphosphate (GGPP) synthase from 
S. cerevisiae that is encoded by BTS1. Combined overexpression of crtE 
(heterologous GGPP synthase) from X. dendrorhous with crtYB and crtI and 
introduction of an additional copy of a truncated 
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase gene (tHMG1) into 
carotenoid-producing cells resulted in a successive increase in carotenoid 
production levels. The strains mentioned produced high levels of intermediates 
of the carotenogenic pathway and comparable low levels of the preferred end 
product beta-carotene, as determined by high-performance liquid chromatography. 
We finally succeeded in constructing an S. cerevisiae strain capable of 
producing high levels of beta-carotene, up to 5.9 mg/g (dry weight), which was 
accomplished by the introduction of an additional copy of crtI and tHMG1 into 
carotenoid-producing yeast cells. This transformant is promising for further 
development toward the biotechnological production of beta-carotene by S. 
cerevisiae.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02759-06
PMCID: PMC1932764
PMID: 17496128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Biotechnol Prog. 2007 May-Jun;23(3):599-605. doi: 10.1021/bp070012p. Epub
2007  May 15.

Increased beta-carotene production in recombinant Escherichia coli harboring an 
engineered isoprenoid precursor pathway with mevalonate addition.

Yoon SH(1), Park HM, Kim JE, Lee SH, Choi MS, Kim JY, Oh DK, Keasling JD, Kim 
SW.

Author information:
(1)Division of Applied Life Science (BK21), EB-NCRC and PMBBRC, and Division of 
Forest Science, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 660-701, Korea.

When pT-LYCm4 containing lycopene synthetic genes was co-transformed with 
pSUcrtY or pSHcrtY containing crtY gene of Pantoea ananatis (P. ananatis) or 
Pantoea agglomerans (P. agglomerans), beta-carotene productions of 36 and 35 
mg/L were obtained, respectively. No lycopene was detected in the beta-carotene 
production culture. pT-HB, constructed by addition of P. ananatis crtY gene into 
pT-LYCm4, was used for co-transformation with pSdxs and pSSN12Didi, which 
increased isopentenyl diphosphate and dimethylallyl diphosphate synthesis. 
beta-Carotene production significantly increased 1.5-fold (51 mg/L) with the 
amplification of the dxs gene through pSdxs and 4-fold (135 mg/L) with the 
mevalonate bottom pathway of pSSN12Didi in the presence of 3.3 mM mevalonate. 
The pT-DHB, constructed by integrating the dxs gene into pT-HB, was used for 
cotransformation of Escherichia coli (E. coli) harboring pSSN12Didi, resulting 
in beta-carotene production of 141 mg/L. Recombinant E. coli harboring pT-DHB 
and pSSN12Didi was used to maximize beta-carotene production by adjusting the 
available amounts of glycerol, a carbon source, and mevalonate, the precursor of 
the mevalonate bottom pathway. When recombinant E. coli was given 16.5 mM 
mevalonate and 2.5% (w/v) glycerol, beta-carotene production of 503 mg/L in 
concentration and 49.3 mg/g DCW in content was obtained at 144 h, which was the 
highest level of carotenoid production in E. coli ever reported in the 
literature.

DOI: 10.1021/bp070012p
PMID: 17500531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2007 May;23(3):429-33. doi: 
10.1016/s1872-2075(07)60034-x.

[Fruit-specific RNAi-mediated Lcy gene enhances content of lycopene in tomatoes 
silencing].

[Article in Chinese]

Wan Q(1), Zhang XG, Song M.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory in Olericulture of Chongqing, College of Horticulture and 
Landscape, Southwest University, Chongqing 400716, China.

Tomatoes ( Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.) are the principal dietary source of 
Lycopene which is one of carotenoid and is highly beneficial in preventing some 
diseases such as the cancer and the heart disease. Suppressing the expression of 
Lcy gene, the main gene regulating the transformation of the lycopene, is a 
convenient and effective way to enhance the content of lycopene. The primers 
were designed according to the gene sequence(U46919)and (X86452) in GenBank. The 
fruit-specific promoter--phytoene desaturase gene(Pds) promoter and the DNA 
segment of the Lcy gene were isolated from the genome DNA of tomatoes. The 3'end 
of Lcy DNA segment was connected together by an intron to inform the RNA 
interferential segment then which was inserted in the expression vector with the 
Pds promoter to inform the fruit-specific expression vector. The vector was 
transformed into the tomatoes through the Agrobacterium tumefaciens. Five 
transformants were obtained. And the PCR proved that the extra-gene was 
integrated into the tomato genome. The lycopene in the transgenic tomatoes fruit 
was increased significantly through analysing the contents of lycopene. These 
results show that regutating biosynthetic enzyme in carotenoid pathway by RNAi 
can improve the lycopene content of plant-derived products.

DOI: 10.1016/s1872-2075(07)60034-x
PMID: 17577988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jul 10;104(28):11784-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0702984104. Epub 2007 Jul 2.

Identification of a fourth family of lycopene cyclases in photosynthetic 
bacteria.

Maresca JA(1), Graham JE, Wu M, Eisen JA, Bryant DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

A fourth and large family of lycopene cyclases was identified in photosynthetic 
prokaryotes. The first member of this family, encoded by the cruA gene of the 
green sulfur bacterium Chlorobium tepidum, was identified in a complementation 
assay with a lycopene-producing strain of Escherichia coli. Orthologs of cruA 
are found in all available green sulfur bacterial genomes and in all 
cyanobacterial genomes that lack genes encoding CrtL- or CrtY-type lycopene 
cyclases. The cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002 has two homologs of 
CruA, denoted CruA and CruP, and both were shown to have lycopene cyclase 
activity. Although all characterized lycopene cyclases in plants are CrtL-type 
proteins, genes orthologous to cruP also occur in plant genomes. The CruA- and 
CruP-type carotenoid cyclases are members of the FixC dehydrogenase superfamily 
and are distantly related to CrtL- and CrtY-type lycopene cyclases. 
Identification of these cyclases fills a major gap in the carotenoid 
biosynthetic pathways of green sulfur bacteria and cyanobacteria.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0702984104
PMCID: PMC1905924
PMID: 17606904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


104. Bioresour Technol. 2008 May;99(8):3166-73. doi:
10.1016/j.biortech.2007.05.051.  Epub 2007 Jul 16.

Use of metabolic stimulators and inhibitors for enhanced production of 
beta-carotene and lycopene by Blakeslea trispora NRRL 2895 and 2896.

Choudhari SM(1), Ananthanarayan L, Singhal RS.

Author information:
(1)Food Engineering and Technology Department, Institute of Chemical Technology, 
University of Mumbai, Matunga, Mumbai 400 019, India. 
sheetalchoudhari@yahoo.co.in <sheetalchoudhari@yahoo.co.in>

This work investigates the potential of metabolic stimulators, firstly to 
enhance the production of beta-carotene, and later use of inhibitors of lycopene 
cyclase so as to accumulate lycopene in the fermentation medium. Various 
non-ionic surfactants, natural oils, stimulators such as amino-acids, 
tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) intermediates, vitamin A and antibiotics were 
investigated for improved production of beta-carotene using the zygomycete 
fungus Blakeslea trispora. Span 20 at 0.2% increased the beta-carotene 
production from 139 mg/l to 318 mg/l. Examination of the mycelial morphology of 
the B. trispora with span 20 showed a shorter mycelial length, which allowed a 
well-dispersed growth of B. trispora. Supplementation of the medium with 1000 
ppm vitamin A acetate gave highest concentration of beta-carotene (830+/-6 
mg/l). Several chemical inhibitors such as imidazole, pyridine, triethylamine, 
piperidine, and nicotinic acid were then evaluated to block the biosynthesis at 
lycopene. Piperidine at 500 ppm gave a 7.76-fold improvement, and produced high 
titers of lycopene (775+/-5 mg/l) in a medium supplemented with vitamin A 
acetate.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2007.05.051
PMID: 17637505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Agric Food Chem. 2007 Sep 5;55(18):7405-17. doi: 10.1021/jf070711h. Epub
2007  Aug 11.

Carotenoid biosynthetic pathway in the citrus genus: number of copies and 
phylogenetic diversity of seven genes.

Fanciullino AL(1), Dhuique-Mayer C, Luro F, Morillon R, Ollitrault P.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Coopération Internationale en Recherche Agronomique pour le 
Développement (CIRAD), UPR Amélioration Génétique des Espèces à Multiplication 
Végétative, Avenue Agropolis - TA A-75 / 02, 34398 Montpellier cedex 5, France.

The first objective of this paper was to analyze the potential role of allelic 
variability of carotenoid biosynthetic genes in the interspecific diversity in 
carotenoid composition of Citrus juices. The second objective was to determine 
the number of copies for each of these genes. Seven carotenoid biosynthetic 
genes were analyzed using restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) and 
simple sequence repeats (SSR) markers. RFLP analyses were performed with the 
genomic DNA obtained from 25 Citrus genotypes using several restriction enzymes. 
cDNA fragments of Psy, Pds, Zds, Lcy-b, Lcy-e, Hy-b, and Zep genes labeled with 
[alpha-(32)P]dCTP were used as probes. For SSR analyses, two primer pairs 
amplifying two SSR sequences identified from expressed sequence tags (ESTs) of 
Lcy-b and Hy-b genes were designed. The number of copies of the seven genes 
ranged from one for Lcy-b to three for Zds. The genetic diversity revealed by 
RFLP and SSR profiles was in agreement with the genetic diversity obtained from 
neutral molecular markers. Genetic interpretation of RFLP and SSR profiles of 
four genes (Psy1, Pds1, Lcy-b, and Lcy-e1) enabled us to make inferences on the 
phylogenetic origin of alleles for the major commercial citrus species. 
Moreover, the results of our analyses suggest that the allelic diversity 
observed at the locus of both of lycopene cyclase genes, Lcy-b and Lcy-e1, is 
associated with interspecific diversity in carotenoid accumulation in Citrus. 
The interspecific differences in carotenoid contents previously reported to be 
associated with other key steps catalyzed by PSY, HY-b, and ZEP were not linked 
to specific alleles at the corresponding loci.

DOI: 10.1021/jf070711h
PMID: 17691802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Transgenic Res. 2008 Aug;17(4):573-85. doi: 10.1007/s11248-007-9131-x. Epub
2007  Sep 13.

Enhancing the carotenoid content of Brassica napus seeds by downregulating 
lycopene epsilon cyclase.

Yu B(1), Lydiate DJ, Young LW, Schäfer UA, Hannoufa A.

Author information:
(1)Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Saskatoon Research Centre, 107 Science 
Place, Saskatoon, SK, Canada.

The accumulation of carotenoids in higher plants is regulated by the 
environment, tissue type and developmental stage. In Brassica napus leaves, 
beta-carotene and lutein were the main carotenoids present while petals 
primarily accumulated lutein and violaxanthin. Carotenoid accumulation in seeds 
was developmentally regulated with the highest levels detected at 35-40 days 
post anthesis. The carotenoid biosynthesis pathway branches after the formation 
of lycopene. One branch forms carotenoids with two beta rings such as 
beta-carotene, zeaxanthin and violaxanthin, while the other introduces both 
beta- and epsilon-rings in lycopene to form alpha-carotene and lutein. By 
reducing the expression of lycopene epsilon-cyclase (epsilon-CYC) using RNAi, we 
investigated altering carotenoid accumulation in seeds of B. napus. Transgenic 
seeds expressing this construct had increased levels of beta-carotene, 
zeaxanthin, violaxanthin and, unexpectedly, lutein. The higher total carotenoid 
content resulting from reduction of epsilon-CYC expression in seeds suggests 
that this gene is a rate-limiting step in the carotenoid biosynthesis pathway. 
epsilon-CYC activity and carotenoid production may also be related to fatty acid 
biosynthesis in seeds as transgenic seeds showed an overall decrease in total 
fatty acid content and minor changes in the proportions of various fatty acids.

DOI: 10.1007/s11248-007-9131-x
PMID: 17851775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Plant Cell. 2007 Oct;19(10):3194-211. doi: 10.1105/tpc.106.049817. Epub 2007
Oct  12.

Manipulation of phytoene levels in tomato fruit: effects on isoprenoids, 
plastids, and intermediary metabolism.

Fraser PD(1), Enfissi EM, Halket JM, Truesdale MR, Yu D, Gerrish C, Bramley PM.

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Royal Holloway, University of London, Egham, 
Surrey, TW20 OEX, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    Plant Cell. 2007 Dec;19(12):4131-2.

In tomato (Solanum lycopersicum), phytoene synthase-1 (PSY-1) is the key 
biosynthetic enzyme responsible for the synthesis of fruit carotenoids. To 
further our understanding of carotenoid formation in tomato fruit, we 
characterized the effect of constitutive expression of an additional tomato 
Psy-1 gene product. A quantitative data set defining levels of 
carotenoid/isoprenoid gene expression, enzyme activities, and metabolites was 
generated from fruit that showed the greatest perturbation in carotenoid 
content. Transcriptional upregulation, resulting in increased enzyme activities 
and metabolites, occurred only in the case of Psy-1, Psy-2, and lycopene cyclase 
B. For reactions involving 1-deoxy-d-xylulose5-phosphate synthase, 
geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase, phytoene desaturase, zeta-carotene 
desaturase, carotene isomerase, and lycopene beta-cyclase, there were no 
correlations between gene expression, enzyme activities, and metabolites. 
Perturbations in carotenoid composition were associated with changes in plastid 
type and with chromoplast-like structures arising prematurely during fruit 
development. The levels of >120 known metabolites were determined. Comparison 
with the wild type illustrated that key metabolites (sucrose, glucose/fructose, 
and Glu) and sectors of intermediary metabolism (e.g., tricarboxylic [corrected] 
acid cycle intermediates and fatty acids) in the Psy-1 transgenic mature green 
fruit resembled changes in metabolism associated with fruit ripening. General 
fruit developmental and ripening properties, such as ethylene production and 
fruit firmness, were unaffected. Therefore, it appears that the changes to 
pigmentation, plastid type, and metabolism associated with Psy-1 overexpression 
are not connected with the ripening process.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.106.049817
PMCID: PMC2174704
PMID: 17933904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2008 Feb;78(1):131-7. doi:
10.1007/s00253-007-1281-5.  Epub 2007 Dec 1.

Lycopene over-accumulation by disruption of the negative regulator gene crgA in 
Mucor circinelloides.

Nicolás-Molina FE(1), Navarro E, Ruiz-Vázquez RM.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Genética y Microbiología, Facultad de Biología, Universidad 
de Murcia, 30071, Murcia, Spain. fnicolas@um.es

Lycopene has become one of the most interesting antioxidant compounds, 
especially in relation to human health. This work describes a genetic strategy 
to modify the carotenoid biosynthesis pathway to develop a 
lycopene-overproducing strain. The crgA gene, a negative regulator of 
carotenogenesis, was disrupted in the Mucor circinelloides strain MU202, which 
lacks the lycopene cyclase activity and accumulates lycopene instead of 
beta-carotene. The resultant strain, MU224, demonstrated increased 
transcriptional levels of the carotenogenesis structural genes carRP and carB 
compared to the parental strain MU202. As a consequence, strain MU224 
accumulated 5 mg/g of dry weight of cells in liquid cultures, a sevenfold 
increase with respect to the parental strain. Moreover, when lycopene production 
was examined in a complex enriched medium, biomass increased tenfold compared to 
that obtained in synthetic minimal medium. In this complex medium, the 
production rate of lycopene by strain MU224 reached 54 g/l. These results 
illustrate how a combination of genetic manipulation and optimized culture 
conditions can be utilized to enhance the production of commercially desirable 
compounds such as lycopene.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-007-1281-5
PMID: 18060399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Protein Expr Purif. 2008 Mar;58(1):23-31. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2007.11.004.
Epub  2007 Nov 19.

Identification of an alternative translation initiation site for the Pantoea 
ananatis lycopene cyclase (crtY) gene in E. coli and its evolutionary 
conservation.

Kim SW(1), Jung WH, Ryu JM, Kim JB, Jang HW, Jo YB, Jung JK, Kim JH.

Author information:
(1)AceBiotech Co., Ltd., #114 Bio-Venture Center, KRIBB, Yuseong, Daejeon 
305-806, Republic of Korea.

Previous sequence analyses of the lycopene cyclase gene (crt Y) from Pantoea 
ananatis revealed that translation of its protein product in Escherichia coli 
began at the ATG start codon. We found, however, that this enzyme could also be 
produced in E. coli without the ATG start codon present. Results of experiments 
using crt Y mutants revealed that a GTG (Val) sequence, located in-frame and 24 
bp downstream of the ATG, could act as a potential start codon. Additionally, a 
point-mutated GTA (Val), replaced from alternative GTG start codon, also 
displayed its potential as a start codon although the strength as a translation 
initiation codon was considerably weak. This finding suggests that non-ATG 
codons, especially one base pairing with the anticodon (3'-UAC-5') in fMet-tRNA, 
might be also able to function as start codon in translation process. 
Furthermore, amino acid sequence alignment of lycopene cyclases from different 
sources suggested that a Val residue located within the N-terminus of these 
enzymes might be used as an alternative translation initiation site. In 
particular, presence of a conserved Asp, located in-frame and 12 bp upstream of 
potential start codon, supports this assumption in view of the fact that Asp 
(GAT or GAC) can function as part of the Shine-Dalgano sequence (AGGAGG).

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2007.11.004
PMID: 18096401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Science. 2008 Jan 18;319(5861):330-3. doi: 10.1126/science.1150255.

Natural genetic variation in lycopene epsilon cyclase tapped for maize 
biofortification.

Harjes CE(1), Rocheford TR, Bai L, Brutnell TP, Kandianis CB, Sowinski SG, 
Stapleton AE, Vallabhaneni R, Williams M, Wurtzel ET, Yan J, Buckler ES.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genomic Diversity, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

Dietary vitamin A deficiency causes eye disease in 40 million children each year 
and places 140 to 250 million at risk for health disorders. Many children in 
sub-Saharan Africa subsist on maize-based diets. Maize displays considerable 
natural variation for carotenoid composition, including vitamin A precursors 
alpha-carotene, beta-carotene, and beta-cryptoxanthin. Through association 
analysis, linkage mapping, expression analysis, and mutagenesis, we show that 
variation at the lycopene epsilon cyclase (lcyE) locus alters flux down 
alpha-carotene versus beta-carotene branches of the carotenoid pathway. Four 
natural lcyE polymorphisms explained 58% of the variation in these two branches 
and a threefold difference in provitamin A compounds. Selection of favorable 
lcyE alleles with inexpensive molecular markers will now enable 
developing-country breeders to more effectively produce maize grain with higher 
provitamin A levels.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1150255
PMCID: PMC2933658
PMID: 18202289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Exp Bot. 2008;59(6):1409-18. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ern048. Epub 2008 Mar 14.

Regulation of carotenoid biosynthetic genes expression and carotenoid 
accumulation in the green alga Haematococcus pluvialis under nutrient stress 
conditions.

Vidhyavathi R(1), Venkatachalam L, Sarada R, Ravishankar GA.

Author information:
(1)Plant Cell Biotechnology Department, Central Food Technological Research 
Institute, Mysore-570 020, India.

Haematococcus pluvialis, a green alga, accumulates carotenoids, predominantly 
astaxanthin, when exposed to stress conditions. In the present work, changes in 
the pigment profile and expression of carotenogenic genes under various nutrient 
stress conditions and their regulation were studied. Nutrient stress and higher 
light intensity in combination with NaCl/sodium acetate (SA) enhanced total 
carotenoid and total astaxanthin content to 32.0 and 24.5 mg g(-1) of dry 
biomass, respectively. Expression of carotenogenic genes, phytoene synthase 
(PSY), phytoene desaturase (PDS), lycopene cyclase (LCY), beta-carotene ketolase 
(BKT), and beta-carotene hydroxylase (CHY) were up-regulated under all the 
stress conditions studied. However, the extent of expression of carotenogenic 
genes varied with stress conditions. Nutrient stress and high light intensity 
induced expression of astaxanthin biosynthetic genes, BKT and CHY, transiently. 
Enhanced expression of these genes was observed with SA and NaCl/SA, while 
expression was delayed with NaCl. The maximum content of astaxanthin recorded in 
cells grown in medium with SA and NaCl/SA correlated with the expression profile 
of the astaxanthin biosynthetic genes. Studies using various inhibitors 
indicated that general carotenogenesis and secondary carotenoid induction were 
regulated at both the transcriptional and the cytoplasmic translational levels. 
The induction of general carotenoid synthesis genes was independent of 
cytoplasmic protein synthesis while BKT gene expression was dependent on de novo 
protein synthesis.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/ern048
PMID: 18343887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2008 Jul;79(5):793-802. doi: 
10.1007/s00253-008-1481-7. Epub 2008 Apr 24.

Conversion of the lycopene monocyclase of Myxococcus xanthus into a bicyclase.

Iniesta AA(1), Cervantes M, Murillo FJ.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Genética y Microbiología, Facultad de Biología, Universidad 
de Murcia, Murcia, Spain. ainiesta@stanford.edu

Depending on the cyclized hydrocarbon backbone ends, carotenoids can be acyclic, 
monocyclic, or bicyclic. Lycopene cyclases are the enzymes responsible for 
catalyzing the formation of cyclic carotenoids from acyclic lycopene. Myxococcus 
xanthus is a bacterium that accumulates monocyclic carotenoids such as a 
glycoside ester of myxobacton. We show here that this bacterium possesses a 
cyclase belonging to the group of the heterodimeric cyclases CrtYc and CrtYd. 
These two individual proteins are encoded by crtYc and crtYd, which are located 
in the carotenogenic carA operon of the carB-carA gene cluster, and the presence 
of both is essential for the cyclization of lycopene. CrtYc and CrtYd from M. 
xanthus form a heterodimeric cyclase with beta-monocyclic activity, which 
converts lycopene into monocyclic gamma-carotene, but not into bicyclic 
beta-carotene like most beta-cyclases. This is an unusual case where two 
different proteins constitute a lycopene cyclase enzyme with monocyclic 
activity. We were able to convert this lycopene monocyclase into a lycopene 
bicyclase enzyme producing beta-carotene, by fusing both proteins with an extra 
transmembrane domain. The chimeric protein appears to allow a proper membranal 
disposition of both CrtYc and CrtYd, to perform two cyclization reactions, while 
a hybrid without the extra transmembrane helix performs only one cyclization.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-008-1481-7
PMID: 18437372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2008 Jul;79(5):819-28. doi: 
10.1007/s00253-008-1492-4. Epub 2008 May 7.

Isolation and characterization of a stress-inducible Dunaliella salina Lcy-beta 
gene encoding a functional lycopene beta-cyclase.

Ramos A(1), Coesel S, Marques A, Rodrigues M, Baumgartner A, Noronha J, Rauter 
A, Brenig B, Varela J.

Author information:
(1)Centre of Marine Sciences (CCMAR), University of Algarve, Campus de Gambelas, 
Faro, Portugal.

The halotolerant green alga Dunaliella salina accumulates large amounts of 
beta-carotene when exposed to various stress conditions. Although several 
studies concerning accumulation and biotechnological production of beta-carotene 
have been published, the molecular basis and regulation of the genes involved in 
carotenoid biosynthesis in D. salina are still poorly known. In this paper, we 
report the isolation and regulation of the lycopene beta-cyclase (Lcy-beta) gene 
by abiotic stress. The function of this gene was determined by heterologous 
genetic complementation in E. coli. Gene expression and physiological analyses 
revealed that D. salina Lcy-beta steady-state transcript and carotenoid levels 
were up-regulated in response to all stress conditions tested (salt, light and 
nutrient depletion). The results presented here suggest that nutrient 
availability is a key factor influencing carotenogenesis as well as carotenoid 
biosynthesis-related gene expression in D. salina.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-008-1492-4
PMID: 18461318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Agric Food Chem. 2008 Jun 25;56(12):4482-90. doi: 10.1021/jf800272k. Epub
2008  May 22.

Lycopene production using Blakeslea trispora in the presence of 2-methyl 
imidazole: yield, selectivity, and safety aspects.

Pegklidou K(1), Mantzouridou F, Tsimidou MZ.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Food Chemistry and Technology, School of Chemistry, Aristotle 
University of Thessaloniki, 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece.

The potential role of 2-methyl imidazole in improving lycopene production by 
Blakeslea trispora with regards to yield, selectivity, and safety aspects was 
investigated in batch culture. Optimization of the bioprocess conditions in 
terms of (a) (+) and (-) strain ratio in the inoculum, (b) initial crude soybean 
oil (CSO) addition level, and (c) the amount of 2-methyl imidazole was based on 
response surface methodology to achieve maximum lycopene production. The 
dependence of growth kinetics, lycopene yield, and selectivity of the bioprocess 
on the above factors was clear. 2-Methyl imidazole at 50 mg/L was found equally 
active in terms of lycopene cyclase inhibition with that at 200 or 100 mg/L; in 
all cases, lycopene accounted for 94% of the total carotenoids. The highest 
yield was observed at a 50 mg/L level of addition (24 mg/g of biomass dry 
weight,) in a substrate supplemented with CSO (48 g/L of culture medium) and 
inoculated with 1(+)/7(-) strain ratio.

DOI: 10.1021/jf800272k
PMID: 18494492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Bioresour Technol. 2008 Dec;99(18):8667-73. doi:
10.1016/j.biortech.2008.04.013.  Epub 2008 May 21.

Enhancement of carotenoids by mutation and stress induced carotenogenic genes in 
Haematococcus pluvialis mutants.

Sandesh Kamath B(1), Vidhyavathi R, Sarada R, Ravishankar GA.

Author information:
(1)Plant Cell Biotechnology Department, Central Food Technological Research 
Institute, Mysore 570 020, India.

Growing culture of green alga Haematococcus was exposed to mutagens such as UV, 
ethyl methane sulphonate (EMS) and 1-methyl 3-nitro 1-nitrosoguanidine (NTG), 
and further screened over herbicide - glufosinate. The survival rate of cells 
decreased with increasing concentration of mutagens and herbicides. The mutants 
exhibited 23-59% increase in total carotenoid and astaxanthin contents. The NTG 
treated glufosinate resistant mutant showed increased (2.2% to 3.8% w/w) 
astaxanthin content. The transcript levels of phytoene synthase, phytoene 
desaturase, lycopene cyclase, beta-carotene ketolase and beta-carotene 
hydroxylase enzymes in the mutant cultures were found to be 13-18, 14-17, 3, 
3-22 and 6-20 fold higher respectively compared to wild type. The mutant 
obtained by UV irradiation showed highest lycopene cyclase activity (458 nmole 
beta-carotene formed/mg protein/h) followed by NTG mutant (315 nmole 
beta-carotene formed/mg protein/h) when compared to that of parent strain (105 
nmole beta-carotene formed/mg protein/h). Expression analysis of carotenoid 
biosynthetic genes in the mutants exhibited increase in transcript levels 
compared to wild type.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2008.04.013
PMID: 18499448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Biochem Cell Biol. 2008 Jun;86(3):285-92. doi: 10.1139/o08-012.

Characterization of cDNA of lycopene beta-cyclase responsible for a high level 
of beta-carotene accumulation in Dunaliella salina.

Zhu YH(1), Jiang JG, Chen Q.

Author information:
(1)College of Food and Bioengineering, South China University of Technology, 
Guangzhou, PR China.

Lycopene beta-cyclase (Lyc-B) is the key enzyme in the catalysis of linear 
lycopene to form cyclic beta-carotene, an indispensable part of the 
photosynthetic apparatus and an important source of vitamin A in human and 
animal nutrition. Studies showing that the microalga Dunaliella salina can 
accumulate a high level of beta-carotene are lacking. We hypothesize that D. 
salina is closely involved with the catalytic mechanism of Lyc-B and the 
molecular regulation of its gene. In this study, we used RT-PCR and RACE-PCR to 
isolate a 2475 bp cDNA with a 1824 bp open reading frame, encoding a putative 
Lyc-B, from D. salina. Homology studies showed that the deduced amino acid 
sequence had a significant overall similarity with sequences of other green 
algae and higher plants, and that it shared the highest sequence identity, up to 
64%, with Lyc-B of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Codon analysis showed that 
synonymous codon usage in the enzyme has a strong bias towards codons ending 
with adenosine. Two motifs were found in the Lyc-B sequence, one at the N 
terminus, for binding the hypothetical cofactor FAD, and the other was a 
substrate carrier motif in oxygenic organisms shared by an earlier 
carotenogenesis enzyme, phytoene desaturase, and Lyc-B. A tertiary structure 
prediction suggested that the catalytic or binding site structure within LycB 
from D. salina is superior to that of both H. pluvialis and C. reinhardtii. The 
LycB protein from D. salina was quite removed from that of H. pluvialis and C. 
reinhardtii in the phylogenetic tree. Taken as a whole, this information 
provides insight into the regulatatory mechanism of Lyc-B at the molecular level 
and the high level of beta-carotene accumulation in the microalga D. salina.

DOI: 10.1139/o08-012
PMID: 18523490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Bacteriol. 2008 Oct;190(19):6384-91. doi: 10.1128/JB.00758-08. Epub 2008
Aug  1.

Isorenieratene biosynthesis in green sulfur bacteria requires the cooperative 
actions of two carotenoid cyclases.

Maresca JA(1), Romberger SP, Bryant DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, S-235 Frear Building, The 
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

The cyclization of lycopene to gamma- or beta-carotene is a major branch point 
in the biosynthesis of carotenoids in photosynthetic bacteria. Four families of 
carotenoid cyclases are known, and each family includes both mono- and 
dicyclases, which catalyze the formation of gamma- and beta-carotene, 
respectively. Green sulfur bacteria (GSB) synthesize aromatic carotenoids, of 
which the most commonly occurring types are the monocyclic chlorobactene and the 
dicyclic isorenieratene. Recently, the cruA gene, encoding a conserved 
hypothetical protein found in the genomes of all GSB and some cyanobacteria, was 
identified as a lycopene cyclase. Further genomic analyses have found that all 
available fully sequenced genomes of GSB encode an ortholog of cruA. 
Additionally, the genomes of all isorenieratene-producing species of GSB encode 
a cruA paralog, now named cruB. The cruA gene from the chlorobactene-producing 
GSB species Chlorobaculum tepidum and both cruA and cruB from the brown-colored, 
isorenieratene-producing GSB species Chlorobium phaeobacteroides strain DSM 
266(T) were heterologously expressed in lycopene- and neurosporene-producing 
strains of Escherichia coli, and the cruB gene of Chlorobium clathratiforme 
strain DSM 5477(T) was also heterologously expressed in C. tepidum by inserting 
the gene at the bchU locus. The results show that CruA is probably a lycopene 
monocyclase in all GSB and that CruB is a gamma-carotene cyclase in 
isorenieratene-producing species. Consequently, the branch point for the 
synthesis of mono- and dicyclic carotenoids in GSB seems to be the modification 
of gamma-carotene, rather than the cyclization of lycopene as occurs in 
cyanobacteria.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00758-08
PMCID: PMC2565998
PMID: 18676669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Exp Bot. 2008;59(13):3563-73. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ern210. Epub 2008 Aug 29.

Expression of carotenoid biosynthesis genes during carrot root development.

Clotault J(1), Peltier D, Berruyer R, Thomas M, Briard M, Geoffriau E.

Author information:
(1)Institut National d'Horticulture, IFR 149 Quasav, UMR 1259 GenHort, F-49045 
Angers, France.

Carotenogenesis has been extensively studied in fruits and flower petals. 
Transcriptional regulation is thought to be the major factor in carotenoid 
accumulation in these organs. However, little is known about regulation in root 
organs. The root carotenoid content of carrot germplasm varies widely. The 
present study was conducted to investigate transcriptional regulation of 
carotenoid biosynthesis genes in relation to carotenoid accumulation during 
early carrot root development and up to 3 months after sowing. HPLC carotenoid 
content analysis and quantitative RT-PCR were compared to quantify the 
expression of eight genes encoding carotenoid biosynthesis enzymes during the 
development of white, yellow, orange, and red carrot roots. The genes chosen 
encode phytoene synthase (PSY1 and PSY2), phytoene desaturase (PDS), 
zeta-carotene desaturase (ZDS1 and ZDS2), lycopene epsilon-cyclase (LCYE), 
lycopene beta-cyclase (LCYB1), and zeaxanthin epoxidase (ZEP). All eight genes 
were expressed in the white cultivar even though it did not contain carotenoids. 
By contrast with fruit maturation, the expression of carotenogenic genes began 
during the early stages of development and then progressively increased for most 
of these genes during root development as the total carotenoid level increased 
in coloured carrots. The high expression of genes encoding LCYE and ZDS noted in 
yellow and red cultivars, respectively, might be consistent with the 
accumulation of lutein and lycopene, respectively. The results showed that the 
accumulation of total carotenoids during development and the accumulation of 
major carotenoids in the red and yellow cultivars might partially be explained 
by the transcriptional level of genes directing the carotenoid biosynthesis 
pathway.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/ern210
PMID: 18757491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Biol Res. 2008;41(1):93-108. doi: 10.4067/S0716-97602008000100011. Epub 2008
Aug  21.

Genomic organization of the structural genes controlling the astaxanthin 
biosynthesis pathway of Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous.

Niklitschek M(1), Alcaíno J, Barahona S, Sepúlveda D, Lozano C, Carmona M, 
Marcoleta A, Martínez C, Lodato P, Baeza M, Cifuentes V.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Ciencias Ecológicas, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de 
Chile, Chile.

The cloning and nucleotide sequence of the genes (idi, crtE, crtYB, crtl and 
crtS) controlling the astaxanthin biosynthesis pathway of the wild-type ATCC 
24230 strain of Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous in their genomic and cDNA version 
were obtained. The idi, crtE, crtYB, crtl and crtS genes were cloned, as 
fragments of 10.9, 11.5, 15.8, 5.9 and 4 kb respectively. The nucleotide 
sequence data analysis indicates that the idi, crtE, crtYB, crtl and crtS genes 
have 4, 8,4, 11, and 17 introns and 5, 9, 5, 12 and 18 exons respectively. In 
addition, a highly efficient site-directed mutagenesis system was developed by 
transformation by integration, followed by mitotic recombination (the double 
recombinant method). Heterozygote idi (idi+/idi-::hph), crtE (crtE+/crtE-::hph), 
crtYB (crtYB+/crtYB-::hph), crtI (crtI+/crtI-::hph) and crtS (crtS+/crtS-::hph) 
and homozygote mutants crtYB (crtYB-::hph/crtYB-::hph), crtI 
(crtI-::hph/crtI-::hph) and crtS (crtS-::hph/crtS-::hph) were constructed. All 
the heterozygote mutants have a pale phenotype and produce less carotenoids than 
the wild-type strain. The genetic analysis of the crtYB, crtl and crtS loci in 
the wild-type, heterozygote, and homozygote give evidence of the diploid 
constitution of ATCC 24230 strains. In addition, the cloning of a truncated form 
of the crtYB that lacks 153 amino acids of the N-terminal region derived from 
alternatively spliced mRNA was obtained. Their heterologous expression in 
Escherichia coli carrying the carotenogenic cluster of Erwinia uredovora result 
in trans-complementation and give evidence of its functionality in this 
bacterium, maintaining its phytoene synthase activity but not the lycopene 
cyclase activity.

DOI: 10.4067/S0716-97602008000100011
PMID: 18769767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Curr Microbiol. 2008 Dec;57(6):527-31. doi: 10.1007/s00284-008-9236-3. Epub
2008  Sep 4.

Effects of an ergosterol synthesis inhibitor on gene transcription of terpenoid 
biosynthesis in Blakeslea trispora.

Tang Q(1), Li Y, Yuan QP.

Author information:
(1)College of Life Science & Technology, Key Laboratory of Bioprocess of 
Beijing, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Post Box No. 75, Bei San 
Huan East Road 15, Chao Yang District, Beijing 100029, China.

Highly efficient induction of carotene biosynthesis of Blakeslea trispora by 
ketoconazole (KCZ), an inhibitor of ergosterol biosynthesis, was found 
previously. To get some insight into the regulatory mechanisms of KCZ 
controlling terpenoid (including carotene) biosynthesis, the transcript levels 
of gene hmgR, encoding HMGR, which initiates the biosynthesis of all terpenoids, 
and gene carRA, encoding lycopene cyclase and phytoene synthase in the carotene 
biosynthsis pathway, were investigated in B. trispora cells treated with KCZ. 
Upon KCZ treatment, up-regulation of hmgR and carRA genes, increased 
beta-carotene and ubiquinone contents, and decreased ergosterol content were all 
observed. The results suggest that the inhibition of ergosterol biosynthesis by 
KCZ triggered hmgR gene transcription, which might present a positive feedback 
regulation of gene hmgR in response to a depletion of ergosterol. Furthermore, 
KCZ could be used as a new agent to improve not only beta-carotene but also 
ubiquinone production, whose regulatory mechanisms controlling terpenoid 
biosynthesis differ from the agents reported previously.

DOI: 10.1007/s00284-008-9236-3
PMID: 18769852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]121. Indian J Biochem Biophys. 2008 Aug;45(4):275-7.

Functional characterization of sll0659 from Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803.

Liang CW(1), Zhang XW, Tian L, Qin S.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao 266071, P.R. 
China.

Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 lacks a gene for the any known types of lycopene 
cyclase. Recently, we reported that Sll0659 (unknown for its function) from 
Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 shows similarity in sequence to a lycopene cyclase 
gene-CruA from Chlorobium tepidum. To test, whether sll0659 encoded protein 
serves as lycopene cyclase, in this study, we investigated the carotenoids of 
the wild types and mutants. In the sll0659 deleted mutant, there is no blockage 
at the lycopene cyclization step. Our results demonstrate that sll0659 does not 
affect lycopene cycilzation. However, the ultrastructure of mutants suggests the 
involvement or necessity of sll0659 in the cell division.

PMID: 18788479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Microbiology (Reading). 2008 Dec;154(Pt 12):3697-3706. doi: 
10.1099/mic.0.2008/021071-0.

Carotenoid 3',4'-desaturase is involved in carotenoid biosynthesis in the 
radioresistant bacterium Deinococcus radiodurans.

Tian B(1), Sun Z(1), Xu Z(1), Shen S(1), Wang H(1), Hua Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory for Nuclear-Agricultural Sciences of Chinese Ministry of 
Agriculture and Zhejiang Province, Institute of Nuclear-Agricultural Sciences, 
Zhejiang University, 310029 Hangzhou, PR China.

Deinococcus radiodurans strain R1 synthesizes deinoxanthin, a unique carotenoid 
product, which contributes to cell resistance following various stresses. The 
biosynthetic pathway of deinoxanthin is unclear, although several enzymes are 
presumed to be involved. The gene (dr2250) predicted by gene homologue analysis 
to encode carotenoid 3',4'-desaturase (CrtD) was deleted to investigate its 
function. A mutant deficient in the gene homologue of crtLm (dr0801) was also 
constructed to verify the catalytic function of the gene product in the native 
host. Carotenoid analysis of the resultant mutants verified that DR2250 encodes 
carotenoid 3',4'-desaturase, which catalyses the C-3',4'-desaturation of the 
monocyclic precursor of deinoxanthin but not acyclic carotenoids. Mutation of 
the gene homologue of crtLm (dr0801) resulted in accumulation of lycopene, 
confirming that it encodes the lycopene cyclase in the native host. The lack of 
CrtD decreased the antioxidant capacity of the mutant deficient in dr2250 
compared with the wild-type, indicating that the C-3',4'-desaturation step 
contributes to the antioxidant capacity of deinoxanthin in D. radiodurans.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.2008/021071-0
PMID: 19047737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Br J Nutr. 2009 Jul;102(2):207-14. doi: 10.1017/S0007114508169902. Epub 2008
Dec  24.

Effect of beta-carotene-rich tomato lycopene beta-cyclase ( tlcy-b) on cell 
growth inhibition in HT-29 colon adenocarcinoma cells.

Palozza P(1), Bellovino D, Simone R, Boninsegna A, Cellini F, Monastra G, 
Gaetani S.

Author information:
(1)Institute of General Pathology, Catholic University School of Medicine, largo 
F. Vito, Roma, Italy.

Lycopene beta-cyclase (tlcy-b) tomatoes, obtained by modulating carotenogenesis 
via genetic engineering, contain a large amount of beta-carotene, as clearly 
visible by their intense orange colour. In the present study we have subjected 
tlcy-b tomatoes to an in vitro simulated digestion and analysed the effects of 
digestate on cell proliferation. To this aim we used HT-29 human colon 
adenocarcinoma cells, grown in monolayers, as a model. Digested tomatoes were 
diluted (20 ml, 50 ml and 100 ml/l) in culture medium and added to the cells for 
different incubation times (24 h, 48 h and 72 h). Inhibition of cell growth by 
tomato digestate was dose-dependent and resulted from an arrest of cell cycle 
progression at the G0/G1 and G2/M phase and by apoptosis induction. A 
down-regulation of cyclin D1, Bcl-2 and Bcl-xl expression was observed. We also 
found that heat treatment of samples before digestion enhanced beta-carotene 
release and therefore cell growth inhibition. To induce with purified 
beta-carotene solubilised in tetrahydrofuran the same cell growth inhibition 
obtained with the tomato digestate, a higher amount of the carotenoid was 
necessary, suggesting that beta-carotene micellarised during digestion is 
utilised more efficiently by the cells, but also that other tomato molecules, 
reasonably made available during digestion, may be present and cooperate with 
beta-carotene in promoting cell growth arrest.

DOI: 10.1017/S0007114508169902
PMID: 19105854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2010 Jan;160(1):269-79. doi:
10.1007/s12010-009-8581-4.  Epub 2009 Mar 6.

Development and validation of a new PCR optimization method by combining 
experimental design and artificial neural network.

Li Y(1), Du X, Yuan Q, Lv X.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Bioprocess of Beijing, Beijing University of Chemical 
Technology, Beijing, China.

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is one of the most powerful techniques in a 
variety of clinical and biological research fields. In this paper, a 
chemometrics approach, combining experimental design (ED) and artificial neural 
network (ANN), was proposed for optimization of PCR amplification of lycopene 
cyclase gene carRA in Blakeslea Trispora. Five-level star design was carried out 
to obtain experimental information and provide data source for ANN modeling. 
Nine variables were used as inputs in ANN, including the added amount of 
template, primer, dNTP, polymerase and magnesium ion, the temperature of 
denaturating, annealing and extension, and the number of cycles. The output 
variable was the efficiency (yield) of the PCR. Based on the developed model, 
the effects of each parameter on PCR efficiency were predicted and the most 
suitable operation condition for present system was determined. At last, the 
validation experiment was performed under the optimized condition, and the 
expectant results were produced. The results obtained in this paper showed that 
the combination of ANN and ED provided a satisfactory optimization model with 
good descriptive and predictive abilities, indicating that the method of 
combining ANN and ED can be a useful tool in PCR optimization and other 
biological applications.

DOI: 10.1007/s12010-009-8581-4
PMID: 19266318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Curr Genet. 2009 Apr;55(2):175-84. doi: 10.1007/s00294-009-0235-0. Epub 2009
Mar  10.

Carotenoids and carotenogenic genes in Podospora anserina: engineering of the 
carotenoid composition extends the life span of the mycelium.

Strobel I(1), Breitenbach J, Scheckhuber CQ, Osiewacz HD, Sandmann G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Cluster of Excellence Macromolecular 
Complexes, Institute of Molecular Biosciences, J. W. Goethe University, 
Frankfurt, Germany. Ingmar.Strobel@gmx.de

Carotenoids have been identified in the fungus Podospora anserina and a parallel 
pathway to neurosporene and beta-carotene was established. Three genes for the 
beta-carotene branch have been cloned and their function elucidated. They 
correspond to the al-1, al-2 and al-3 genes from Neurospora crassa. They were 
individually and in combinations over-expressed in P. anserina in order to 
modify the carotenoid composition qualitatively and quantitatively. In the 
resulting transformants, carotenoid synthesis was up to eightfold increased and 
several intermediates of the pathway together with special cyclic carotenoids, 
beta-zeacarotene and 7,8-dihydro-beta-carotene, accumulated. All transformants 
with an over-expressed al-2 gene (encoding a phytoene synthase and a lycopene 
cyclase) displayed up to 31% prolonged life span.

DOI: 10.1007/s00294-009-0235-0
PMID: 19277665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Exp Bot. 2009;60(6):1783-97. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erp048. Epub 2009 Mar 26.

Molecular and functional characterization of a novel chromoplast-specific 
lycopene beta-cyclase from Citrus and its relation to lycopene accumulation.

Alquézar B(1), Zacarías L, Rodrigo MJ.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Agroquímica y Tecnología de Alimentos (IATA), Consejo Superior 
de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Valencia, Spain.

Carotenoids are the main pigments responsible of the colouration of Citrus 
fruits. The beta-cyclization of lycopene, catalysed by the lycopene 
beta-cyclases (beta-LCY), seems to be a key regulatory step of the carotenoid 
pathway. In the present study, two beta-LCYs from orange fruits (Citrus 
sinensis), named Csbeta-LCY1 and Csbeta-LCY2 have been isolated and the activity 
of the encoded proteins was demonstrated by functional analysis. Csbeta-LCY1 was 
expressed at low levels and remained relatively constant during fruit ripening 
while Csbeta-LCY2 showed a chromoplast-specific expression and a marked 
induction in both peel and pulp of orange fruits in parallel with the 
accumulation of beta,beta-xanthophylls. The potential involvement of Csbeta-LCY2 
in the accumulation of lycopene, characteristic of some Citrus species such as 
red grapefruits, was investigated. Expression of Csbeta-LCY2 and another seven 
carotenoid biosynthetic genes were studied in the peel and pulp of the high 
lycopene-accumulating grapefruit, Star Ruby, and compared with those of ordinary 
Navel orange. In Star Ruby, the accumulation of lycopene during fruit maturation 
was associated with a substantial reduction in the expression of both beta-LCY2 
and beta-CHX genes with respect to Navel orange. Moreover, two different alleles 
of beta-LCY2: beta-LCY2a and beta-LCY2b were isolated from both genotypes, and 
functional assays demonstrated that the lycopene beta-cyclase activity of the 
allele b was almost null. Interestingly, Star Ruby grapefruit predominantly 
expressed the unfunctional beta-LCY2b allele during fruit ripening whereas Navel 
oranges preferably expressed the functional allele. It is suggested that the 
presence of diverse alleles of the beta-LCY2 gene, encoding enzymes with altered 
activity, with different transcript accumulation may be an additional regulatory 
mechanism of carotenoid synthesis involved in the accumulation of lycopene in 
red grapefruits.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erp048
PMCID: PMC2671624
PMID: 19325166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Plant J. 2009 Aug;59(4):588-99. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03899.x. Epub
2009  Apr 25.

Novel lycopene epsilon cyclase activities in maize revealed through perturbation 
of carotenoid biosynthesis.

Bai L(1), Kim EH, DellaPenna D, Brutnell TP.

Author information:
(1)Boyce Thompson Institute, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

In maize, human selection for yellow endosperm has led to diversification of 
grain carotenoid content and composition. This variation has remained largely 
untapped in modern breeding programs that have focused nearly exclusively on 
yield gains. In this paper, we show that carotenoid accumulation patterns differ 
in maize embryo and endosperm tissues, and that this tissue-specific 
accumulation is largely mediated through differential expression of genes 
encoding lycopene beta-cyclase and lycopene epsilon-cyclase (LcyB and LcyE). In 
the absence of LCYB function, LCYE produces a number of unusual carotenes, 
including delta-carotene, epsilon-carotene and lactucaxanthin 
(epsilon,epsilon-carotene-3,3'-diol), in endosperm tissue. A similar carotene 
cyclization profile is seen when LcyE is introduced into lycopene-accumulating 
Escherichia coli cells, suggesting that the carotenoid profile in the endosperm 
tissue of the lcyB mutant is largely due to the activity of LCYE in the absence 
of LCYB. Using site-directed mutagenesis of LcyE, critical amino acids were 
defined that regulate the product specificity of the enzyme. Finally, we show 
that several genes encoding enzymes in isoprenoid and carotenoid biosynthesis 
are probably subject to negative transcriptional regulation, mediated by a 
carotenoid or a molecule derived from a carotenoid. The implications of these 
findings with respect to breeding for carotenoid composition in maize grain are 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03899.x
PMID: 19392686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Hered. 2009 Nov-Dec;100(6):754-61. doi: 10.1093/jhered/esp026. Epub 2009
Jun  11.

Patterns of variation in the evolution of carotenoid biosynthetic pathway 
enzymes of higher plants.

Livingstone K(1), Anderson S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Trinity University, San Antonio, TX 78212, USA. 
klivings@trinity.edu

Cellular metabolic networks depend on the products of many loci for proper 
functioning. These interrelationships between loci at the phenotypic level raise 
the question of whether they evolve independently. Previous research has 
demonstrated that in the anthocyanin pathway, which produces important secondary 
metabolites in plants, the genes encoding downstream enzymes show an increased 
rate of change at nonsynonymous sites when compared with upstream loci due to 
relaxed constraint. To test whether this pattern exists more broadly, we 
compared a set of 4 genes encoding enzymes of the carotenoid biosynthetic 
pathway, which produces a set of distinct colored secondary metabolites in 
plants. Comparisons between copies of phytoene desaturase, zeta-carotene 
desaturase, lycopene beta-cyclase, and zeaxanthin epoxidase from 6 taxa indicate 
that the 3 upstream enzymes (phytoene desaturase, zeta-carotene desaturase, and 
lycopene beta-cyclase) have similar proportions of codons under selective 
constraint, whereas the most downstream enzyme (zeaxanthin epoxidase) has more 
codons evolving under relaxed constraint. Overall, nonsynonymous substitution 
rates appear to be highest for zeaxanthin epoxidase, whereas synonymous 
substitution rates were highest for the intermediate enzyme lycopene 
beta-cyclase. Analysis of codon bias shows that only lycopene beta-cyclase may 
be under slight selection pressure for codon usage. Taken together, these 
results show that the enzymes of the carotenoid biosynthetic pathway are under 
strong selective constraint but that the most downstream enzyme is under the 
least constraint.

DOI: 10.1093/jhered/esp026
PMID: 19520763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Plant Cell. 2009 Jun;21(6):1798-812. doi: 10.1105/tpc.109.066571. Epub 2009
Jun  23.

Lutein accumulation in the absence of zeaxanthin restores nonphotochemical 
quenching in the Arabidopsis thaliana npq1 mutant.

Li Z(1), Ahn TK, Avenson TJ, Ballottari M, Cruz JA, Kramer DM, Bassi R, Fleming 
GR, Keasling JD, Niyogi KK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California, 
Berkeley, California 94720-3102, USA.

Plants protect themselves from excess absorbed light energy through thermal 
dissipation, which is measured as nonphotochemical quenching of chlorophyll 
fluorescence (NPQ). The major component of NPQ, qE, is induced by high 
transthylakoid DeltapH in excess light and depends on the xanthophyll cycle, in 
which violaxanthin and antheraxanthin are deepoxidized to form zeaxanthin. To 
investigate the xanthophyll dependence of qE, we identified suppressor of 
zeaxanthin-less1 (szl1) as a suppressor of the Arabidopsis thaliana npq1 mutant, 
which lacks zeaxanthin. szl1 npq1 plants have a partially restored qE but lack 
zeaxanthin and have low levels of violaxanthin, antheraxanthin, and neoxanthin. 
However, they accumulate more lutein and alpha-carotene than the wild type. szl1 
contains a point mutation in the lycopene beta-cyclase (LCYB) gene. Based on the 
pigment analysis, LCYB appears to be the major lycopene beta-cyclase and is not 
involved in neoxanthin synthesis. The Lhcb4 (CP29) and Lhcb5 (CP26) protein 
levels are reduced by 50% in szl1 npq1 relative to the wild type, whereas other 
Lhcb proteins are present at wild-type levels. Analysis of carotenoid radical 
cation formation and leaf absorbance changes strongly suggest that the higher 
amount of lutein substitutes for zeaxanthin in qE, implying a direct role in qE, 
as well as a mechanism that is weakly sensitive to carotenoid structural 
properties.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.109.066571
PMCID: PMC2714924
PMID: 19549928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Exp Bot. 2009;60(13):3765-79. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erp218. Epub 2009 Jul 2.

The kiwifruit lycopene beta-cyclase plays a significant role in carotenoid 
accumulation in fruit.

Ampomah-Dwamena C(1), McGhie T, Wibisono R, Montefiori M, Hellens RP, Allan AC.

Author information:
(1)The New Zealand Institute for Plant and Food Research Limited, Auckland, New 
Zealand. cdwamena@hortresearch.co.nz

The composition of carotenoids, along with anthocyanins and chlorophyll, 
accounts for the distinctive range of colour found in the Actinidia (kiwifruit) 
species. Lutein and beta-carotene are the most abundant carotenoids found during 
fruit development, with beta-carotene concentration increasing rapidly during 
fruit maturation and ripening. In addition, the accumulation of beta-carotene 
and lutein is influenced by the temperature at which harvested fruit are stored. 
Expression analysis of carotenoid biosynthetic genes among different genotypes 
and fruit developmental stages identified Actinidia lycopene beta-cyclase 
(LCY-beta) as the gene whose expression pattern appeared to be associated with 
both total carotenoid and beta-carotene accumulation. Phytoene desaturase (PDS) 
expression was the least variable among the different genotypes, while zeta 
carotene desaturase (ZDS), beta-carotene hydroxylase (CRH-beta), and epsilon 
carotene hydroxylase (CRH-epsilon) showed some variation in gene expression. The 
LCY-beta gene was functionally tested in bacteria and shown to convert lycopene 
and delta-carotene to beta-carotene and alpha-carotene respectively. This 
indicates that the accumulation of beta-carotene, the major carotenoid in these 
kiwifruit species, appears to be controlled by the level of expression of 
LCY-beta gene.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erp218
PMCID: PMC2736891
PMID: 19574250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Plant Physiol. 2009 Sep;151(1):59-66. doi: 10.1104/pp.109.140533. Epub 2009
Jul  8.

Enhancement of carotenoid biosynthesis in transplastomic tomatoes by induced 
lycopene-to-provitamin A conversion.

Apel W(1), Bock R.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie, D-14476 Potsdam-Golm, 
Germany.

Carotenoids are essential pigments of the photosynthetic apparatus and an 
indispensable component of the human diet. In addition to being potent 
antioxidants, they also provide the vitamin A precursor beta-carotene. In tomato 
(Solanum lycopersicum) fruits, carotenoids accumulate in specialized plastids, 
the chromoplasts. How the carotenoid biosynthetic pathway is regulated and what 
limits total carotenoid accumulation in fruit chromoplasts is not well 
understood. Here, we have introduced the lycopene beta-cyclase genes from the 
eubacterium Erwinia herbicola and the higher plant daffodil (Narcissus 
pseudonarcissus) into the tomato plastid genome. While expression of the 
bacterial enzyme did not strongly alter carotenoid composition, expression of 
the plant enzyme efficiently converted lycopene, the major storage carotenoid of 
the tomato fruit, into provitamin A (beta-carotene). In green leaves of the 
transplastomic tomato plants, more lycopene was channeled into the beta-branch 
of carotenoid biosynthesis, resulting in increased accumulation of xanthophyll 
cycle pigments and correspondingly reduced accumulation of the alpha-branch 
xanthophyll lutein. In fruits, most of the lycopene was converted into 
beta-carotene with provitamin A levels reaching 1 mg per g dry weight. 
Unexpectedly, transplastomic tomatoes also showed a >50% increase in total 
carotenoid accumulation, indicating that lycopene beta-cyclase expression 
enhanced the flux through the pathway in chromoplasts. Our results provide new 
insights into the regulation of carotenoid biosynthesis and demonstrate the 
potential of plastids genome engineering for the nutritional enhancement of food 
crops.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.109.140533
PMCID: PMC2735999
PMID: 19587100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Exp Bot. 2010;61(1):105-19. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erp283.

The expression of a chromoplast-specific lycopene beta cyclase gene is involved 
in the high production of saffron's apocarotenoid precursors.

Ahrazem O(1), Rubio-Moraga A, López RC, Gómez-Gómez L.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Ciencia y Tecnología Agroforestal y Genética, ETSIA, 
Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha, Campus Universitario s/n, E-02071 Albacete, 
Spain.

Crocus sativus is a triploid sterile plant characterized by its long red 
stigmas, which produce and store significant quantities of carotenoid 
derivatives formed from the oxidative cleavage of beta-carotene and zeaxanthin. 
The present study reports on the genomic structures of two lycopene-beta-cyclase 
genes, CstLcyB1 and CstLcyB2a, and on their transcription patterns in different 
C. sativus tissues. Phylogenetic analysis showed that both proteins are located 
in different groups: CstLcyB2a encodes chromoplast-specific lycopene cyclases, 
with an expression analysis showing strongly in flower stigmas where it 
activates and boosts beta-carotene accumulation. The CstLcyB1 transcript, 
however, was present in leaves, tepals, and stigmas at lower levels. In vivo 
assays in transgenic Arabidopsis demonstrated lycopene beta-cyclase activity of 
CstLcyB2a. CstLcyB2a is a CstLcyB1 paralogue derived through a gene duplication 
event, while promoter analysis showed that both genes have diverged in their 
regulatory sequences after duplication. Furthermore, it was found that the 
CstLcyB2a gene was absent from Crocus kotschyanus and, although present in C. 
goulimyi and C. cancellatus, the absence of transcripts suggests that 
transcriptional regulation of CstLcyB2a is responsible for the low apocarotenoid 
content in these species.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erp283
PMID: 19767307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2009 Nov;75(22):7205-11. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01249-09.
Epub  2009 Oct 2.

Metabolic engineering of Saccharomyces cerevisiae for astaxanthin production and 
oxidative stress tolerance.

Ukibe K(1), Hashida K, Yoshida N, Takagi H.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and 
Technology, 8916-5 Takayama, Ikoma, Nara 630-0192, Japan.

The red carotenoid astaxanthin possesses higher antioxidant activity than other 
carotenoids and has great commercial potential for use in the aquaculture, 
pharmaceutical, and food industries. In this study, we produced astaxanthin in 
the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae by introducing the genes involved in 
astaxanthin biosynthesis of carotenogenic microorganisms. In particular, 
expression of genes of the red yeast Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous encoding 
phytoene desaturase (crtI product) and bifunctional phytoene synthase/lycopene 
cyclase (crtYB product) resulted in the accumulation of a small amount of 
beta-carotene in S. cerevisiae. Overexpression of geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate 
(GGPP) synthase from S. cerevisiae (the BTS1 gene product) increased the 
intracellular beta-carotene levels due to the accelerated conversion of farnesyl 
pyrophosphate to GGPP. Introduction of the X. dendrorhous crtS gene, encoding 
astaxanthin synthase, assumed to be the cytochrome P450 enzyme, did not lead to 
astaxanthin production. However, coexpression of CrtS with X. dendrorhous CrtR, 
a cytochrome P450 reductase, resulted in the accumulation of a small amount of 
astaxanthin. In addition, the beta-carotene-producing yeast cells transformed by 
the bacterial genes crtW and crtZ, encoding beta-carotene ketolase and 
hydroxylase, respectively, also accumulated astaxanthin and its intermediates, 
echinenone, canthaxanthin, and zeaxanthin. Interestingly, we found that these 
ketocarotenoids conferred oxidative stress tolerance on S. cerevisiae cells. 
This metabolic engineering has potential for overproduction of astaxanthin and 
breeding of novel oxidative stress-tolerant yeast strains.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01249-09
PMCID: PMC2786542
PMID: 19801484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Exp Bot. 2010;61(1):33-9. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erp284.

Isolation and functional characterization of a lycopene beta-cyclase gene that 
controls fruit colour of papaya (Carica papaya L.).

Devitt LC(1), Fanning K, Dietzgen RG, Holton TA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Employment, Economic Development and Innovation (DEEDI), 
Primary Industries and Fisheries, Queensland Agricultural Biotechnology Centre, 
PO Box 6097, Australia.

The colour of papaya fruit flesh is determined largely by the presence of 
carotenoid pigments. Red-fleshed papaya fruit contain lycopene, whilst this 
pigment is absent from yellow-fleshed fruit. The conversion of lycopene (red) to 
beta-carotene (yellow) is catalysed by lycopene beta-cyclase. This present study 
describes the cloning and functional characterization of two different genes 
encoding lycopene beta-cyclases (lcy-beta1 and lcy-beta2) from red (Tainung) and 
yellow (Hybrid 1B) papaya cultivars. A mutation in the lcy-beta2 gene, which 
inactivates enzyme activity, controls lycopene production in fruit and is 
responsible for the difference in carotenoid production between red and 
yellow-fleshed papaya fruit. The expression level of both lcy-beta1 and 
lcy-beta2 genes is similar and low in leaves, but lcy-beta2 expression increases 
markedly in ripe fruit. Isolation of the lcy-beta2 gene from papaya, that is 
preferentially expressed in fruit and is correlated with fruit colour, will 
facilitate marker-assisted breeding for fruit colour in papaya and should create 
possibilities for metabolic engineering of carotenoid production in papaya fruit 
to alter both colour and nutritional properties.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erp284
PMCID: PMC2791114
PMID: 19887502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Wei Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 2009 Sep;49(9):1180-9.

[Cloning and analysis of the gene encoding lycopene epsilon cyclase in Chlorella 
protothecoides CS-41].

[Article in Chinese]

Li T(1), Shi C, Gan Z, Shi X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Science & Technology and Bor Luh Food Safety Center, 
School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 
200240, China. liting8848@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: Lycopene epsilon cyclase (LCYE) is the key enzyme in the lutein 
synthesis pathway and catalyses linear lycopene to form cyclic epsilon-carotene, 
a presucursor of lutein. We aimed to clone the full-length cDNA of LCYE gene 
from Chlorella protothecoides CS-41, to predict the functional sites and the 
three-dimensional structure of LCYE through bioinformatics analysis and to 
confirm its activities and functions.
METHOD: We used RACE (rapid-amplification of cDNA ends) essay and RT-PCR for the 
cloning of the full-length cDNA of LCYE from C. protothecoides CS-41. The online 
software such as PredictProtein, Pfam HMMs and Swiss-Model were used in 
bioinformatics analysis of the amino acid sequence of LCYE protein. We 
constructed the expression vector for LCYE gene with pET-28a(+) and transformed 
into Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3). Furthermore, the E. coli strain containing the 
pAC-LYC plasmid which could accumulate lycopene was used for the functional 
confirmation of LCYE from C. protothecoides CS-41.
RESULTS: A 2107 bp cDNA (GenBank Accession No. FJ752528) sequence was cloned 
with 1731 bp open reading frame, encoding a putative LCYE, from C. 
protothecoides CS-41. Homology studies showed that the deduced amino acid 
sequence of LCYE gene had a significant similarity with the corresponding 
sequences of other green algae and higher plants. It shared the highest sequence 
identity, up to 67%, with the LCYE gene from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. One 
typical lycopene cyclase protein domain (Pfam05834) was predicted between the 
48th-459th amino acid. In addition, the sequence between 261th -284th was one 
typical conserved lycopene cyclase protein motif. The SDS-PAGE result showed 
that the LCYE gene was overexpressed in Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3) after the 
addition of IPTG. The prokaryotically expressed LCYE protein was able to 
transfer the color of the E. coli strain containing the pAC-LYC plasmid from 
pink to yellow.
CONCLUSION: The full-length cDNA sequence of LCYE gene was successfully cloned 
with the size of 2107 bp. Several typical motifs were found and the 
three-dimensional structure of LCYE was constructed from Bioinformatics 
analysis. The generated phylogenetic tree showed the closest relationship 
between C. protothecoides CS-41 and C. reinhardtii among the listed organisms. 
Finally, the expression product of the LCYE gene cloned in the study was 
confirmed to hold the function and activity of lycopene epsilon cyclase.

PMID: 20030056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 16;285(16):12109-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.091843.
Epub  2010 Feb 23.

The lycopene cyclase CrtY from Pantoea ananatis (formerly Erwinia uredovora) 
catalyzes an FADred-dependent non-redox reaction.

Yu Q(1), Schaub P, Ghisla S, Al-Babili S, Krieger-Liszkay A, Beyer P.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

The cyclization of lycopene generates provitamin A carotenoids such as 
beta-carotene and paves the way toward the formation of cyclic xanthophylls 
playing distinct roles in photosynthesis and as precursors for regulatory 
molecules in plants and animals. The biochemistry of lycopene cyclization has 
been enigmatic, as the previously proposed acid-base catalysis conflicted with 
the possibility of redox catalysis as predicted by the presence of a 
dinucleotide binding site. We show that reduced FAD is the essential lycopene 
cyclase (CrtY) cofactor. Using flavin analogs, mass spectrometry, and 
mutagenesis, evidence was obtained based on which a catalytic mechanism relying 
on cryptic (net) electron transfer can be refuted. The role of reduced FAD is 
proposed to reside in the stabilization of a transition state carrying a 
(partial) positive charge or of a positively charged intermediate via a charge 
transfer interaction, acid-base catalysis serving as the underlying catalytic 
principle. Lycopene cyclase, thus, ranks among the novel class of non-redox 
flavoproteins, such as isopentenyl diphosphate:dimethylallyl diphosphate 
isomerase type 2 (IDI-2) that requires the reduced form of the cofactor.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.091843
PMCID: PMC2852950
PMID: 20178989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Plant Physiol. 2010 Apr;152(4):2013-22. doi: 10.1104/pp.109.152298. Epub
2010  Feb 24.

Cloning of the papaya chromoplast-specific lycopene beta-cyclase, CpCYC-b, 
controlling fruit flesh color reveals conserved microsynteny and a recombination 
hot spot.

Blas AL(1), Ming R, Liu Z, Veatch OJ, Paull RE, Moore PH, Yu Q.

Author information:
(1)Hawaii Agriculture Research Center, Kunia, Hawaii 96759, USA.

Carotenoid pigments in fruits are indicative of the ripening process and 
potential nutritional value. Papaya (Carica papaya) fruit flesh color is caused 
by the accumulation of lycopene or beta-carotenoids in chromoplasts. It is a 
distinct feature affecting nutritional composition, fruit quality, shelf life, 
and consumer preference. To uncover the molecular basis of papaya flesh color, 
we took map-based cloning and candidate gene approaches using integrated genetic 
and physical maps. A DNA marker tightly linked to flesh color colocalized on a 
contig of the physical map with a cDNA probe of the tomato (Solanum 
lycopersicum) chromoplast-specific lycopene beta-cyclase, CYC-b. Candidate gene 
sequences were obtained from amplified fragments and verified by sequencing two 
bacterial artificial chromosomes containing the two alleles. Sequence comparison 
revealed a 2-bp insertion in the coding region of the recessive red flesh allele 
resulting in a frame-shift mutation and a premature stop codon. A color 
complementation test in bacteria confirmed that the papaya CpCYC-b is the gene 
controlling fruit flesh color. Sequence analysis of wild and cultivated papaya 
accessions showed the presence of this frame-shift mutation in all red flesh 
accessions examined. Evaluation of DNA markers near CpCYC-b revealed a 
recombination hot spot, showing that CpCYC-b is located in a gene-rich region 
with a recombination rate at 3.7 kb per centimorgan, more than 100-fold higher 
than the genome average at 400 kb per centimorgan. Conserved microsynteny of the 
CpCYC-b region is indicated by colinearity of two to four genes between papaya, 
Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), grape (Vitis vinifera), and tomato. Our 
results enhanced our understanding of papaya flesh color inheritance and 
generated new tools for papaya improvement.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.109.152298
PMCID: PMC2850019
PMID: 20181753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


138. BMC Plant Biol. 2010 Apr 9;10:61. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-10-61.

Isolation and functional characterization of lycopene beta-cyclase (CYC-B) 
promoter from Solanum habrochaites.

Dalal M(1), Chinnusamy V, Bansal KC.

Author information:
(1)National Research Centre on Plant Biotechnology, Indian Agricultural Research 
Institute, New Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND: Carotenoids are a group of C40 isoprenoid molecules that play 
diverse biological and ecological roles in plants. Tomato is an important 
vegetable in human diet and provides the vitamin A precursor beta-carotene. 
Genes encoding enzymes involved in carotenoid biosynthetic pathway have been 
cloned. However, regulation of genes involved in carotenoid biosynthetic pathway 
and accumulation of specific carotenoid in chromoplasts are not well understood. 
One of the approaches to understand regulation of carotenoid metabolism is to 
characterize the promoters of genes encoding proteins involved in carotenoid 
metabolism. Lycopene beta-cyclase is one of the crucial enzymes in carotenoid 
biosynthesis pathway in plants. Its activity is required for synthesis of both 
alpha-and beta-carotenes that are further converted into other carotenoids such 
as lutein, zeaxanthin, etc. This study describes the isolation and 
characterization of chromoplast-specific Lycopene beta-cyclase (CYC-B) promoter 
from a green fruited S. habrochaites genotype EC520061.
RESULTS: A 908 bp region upstream to the initiation codon of the Lycopene 
beta-cyclase gene was cloned and identified as full-length promoter. To identify 
promoter region necessary for regulating developmental expression of the ShCYC-B 
gene, the full-length promoter and its three different 5' truncated fragments 
were cloned upstream to the initiation codon of GUS reporter cDNA in binary 
vectors. These four plant transformation vectors were separately transformed in 
to Agrobacterium. Agrobacterium-mediated transient and stable expression systems 
were used to study the GUS expression driven by the full-length promoter and its 
5' deletion fragments in tomato. The full-length promoter showed a basal level 
activity in leaves, and its expression was upregulated > 5-fold in flowers and 
fruits in transgenic tomato plants. Deletion of -908 to -577 bp 5' to ATG 
decreases the ShCYC-B promoter strength, while deletion of -908 to -437 bp 5' to 
ATG led to significant increase in the activity of GUS in the transgenic plants. 
Promoter deletion analysis led to the identification of a short promoter region 
(-436 bp to ATG) that exhibited a higher promoter strength but similar 
developmental expression pattern as compared with the full-length ShCYC-B 
promoter.
CONCLUSION: Functional characterization of the full-length ShCYC-B promoter and 
its deletion fragments in transient expression system in fruto as well as in 
stable transgenic tomato revealed that the promoter is developmentally regulated 
and its expression is upregulated in chromoplast-rich flowers and fruits. Our 
study identified a short promoter region with functional activity and 
developmental expression pattern similar to that of the full-length ShCYC-B 
promoter. This 436 bp promoter region can be used in promoter::reporter fusion 
molecular genetic screens to identify mutants impaired in CYC-B expression, and 
thus can be a valuable tool in understanding carotenoid metabolism in tomato. 
Moreover, this short promoter region of ShCYC-B may be useful in genetic 
engineering of carotenoid content and other agronomic traits in tomato fruits.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2229-10-61
PMCID: PMC2923535
PMID: 20380705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Neural Transm Suppl. 2009;(73):333-41. doi: 10.1007/978-3-211-92660-4_28.

Intake of tomato-enriched diet protects from 6-hydroxydopamine-induced 
degeneration of rat nigral dopaminergic neurons.

di Matteo V(1), Pierucci M, Di Giovanni G, Dragani LK, Murzilli S, Poggi A, 
Esposito E.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Consorzio Mario Negri Sud, 
66030 Santa Maria Imbaro (CH), Italy. vdimatteo@negrisud.it

There is extensive evidence that oxidative damage of dopamine (DA)-containing 
neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc) may contribute to the 
pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease (PD). We evaluated the potential 
neuroprotective effect of diets enriched with wild-type Red Setter (RS) tomato 
or transgenic High Carotene (HC) tomato, rich in beta-carotene, obtained by the 
activation of lycopene beta-cyclase (tlcy-b), in an animal model of PD. Male 
Fischer 344 rats were fed for 14 days with standard Altromin diet, 5% RS- or 5% 
HC-enriched diet. Seven days after the beginning of this diet regimen, the rats 
were lesioned by 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) injected into the left SNc. After 
further 7 days, the rats were sacrificed, and DA and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic 
acid (DOPAC) levels in both the left (ipsilateral) and the right (contralateral) 
striata were measured. Striatal DA levels were reduced by 86.5 +/- 5.0% in 
control, 86.2 +/- 5.0% in HC-, and 56.0 +/- 9.0% in RS-fed group. Striatal DOPAC 
was decreased by 85.6 +/- 5.0% in controls, 83.0 +/- 6.0% in HC-, and 58.9 +/- 
10.0% in RS-fed group. Blood was obtained from the rats on day 14 and the plasma 
level of licopene and beta-carotene was measured by liquid 
chromatography-atmospheric pressure chemical ionization-mass spectrometry 
(LC-APCI-MS) for the determination of lycopene and beta-carotene levels. The 
plasma level of lycopene was 4.7 +/- 0.2 ng/ml in 5% RS-fed rats, while it was 
undetectable (< 2.5 ng ml(-1)) in control and HC-fed rats. The efficacy of RS 
diet to preserve striatal dopaminergic innervation can be attributed to the 
ability of lycopene to prevent the degeneration of DA-containing neurons in the 
SNc.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-211-92660-4_28
PMID: 20411791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Plant Physiol. 2010 Jul;153(3):970-9. doi: 10.1104/pp.110.155440. Epub 2010
May  11.

Characterization of plant carotenoid cyclases as members of the flavoprotein 
family functioning with no net redox change.

Mialoundama AS(1), Heintz D, Jadid N, Nkeng P, Rahier A, Deli J, Camara B, 
Bouvier F.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Biologie Moléculaire des Plantes, CNRS and Université de 
Strasbourg, 67084 Strasbourg cedex, France.

The later steps of carotenoid biosynthesis involve the formation of cyclic 
carotenoids. The reaction is catalyzed by lycopene beta-cyclase (LCY-B), which 
converts lycopene into beta-carotene, and by capsanthin-capsorubin synthase 
(CCS), which is mainly dedicated to the synthesis of kappa-cyclic carotenoids 
(capsanthin and capsorubin) but also has LCY-B activity. Although the peptide 
sequences of plant LCY-Bs and CCS contain a putative dinucleotide-binding motif, 
it is believed that these two carotenoid cyclases proceed via protic activation 
and stabilization of resulting carbocation intermediates. Using pepper (Capsicum 
annuum) CCS as a prototypic carotenoid cyclase, we show that the monomeric 
protein contains one noncovalently bound flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) that 
is essential for enzyme activity only in the presence of NADPH, which functions 
as the FAD reductant. The reaction proceeds without transfer of hydrogen from 
the dinucleotide cofactors to beta-carotene or capsanthin. Using site-directed 
mutagenesis, amino acids potentially involved in the protic activation were 
identified. Substitutions of alanine, lysine, and arginine for glutamate-295 in 
the conserved 293-FLEET-297 motif of pepper CCS or LCY-B abolish the formation 
of beta-carotene and kappa-cyclic carotenoids. We also found that mutations of 
the equivalent glutamate-196 located in the 194-LIEDT-198 domain of structurally 
divergent bacterial LCY-B abolish the formation of beta-carotene. The data 
herein reveal plant carotenoid cyclases to be novel enzymes that combine 
characteristics of non-metal-assisted terpene cyclases with those attributes 
typically found in flavoenzymes that catalyze reactions, with no net redox, such 
as type 2 isopentenyl diphosphate isomerase. Thus, FAD in its reduced form could 
be implicated in the stabilization of the carbocation intermediate.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.110.155440
PMCID: PMC2899934
PMID: 20460582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Plant Mol Biol. 2010 Aug;73(6):659-71. doi: 10.1007/s11103-010-9647-y. Epub
2010  May 19.

Identification of alleles of carotenoid pathway genes important for zeaxanthin 
accumulation in potato tubers.

Wolters AM(1), Uitdewilligen JG, Kloosterman BA, Hutten RC, Visser RG, van Eck 
HJ.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Plant Breeding, Wageningen University, PO Box 386, 6700 AJ 
Wageningen, The Netherlands. Anne-marie.Wolters@wur.nl

We have investigated the genetics and molecular biology of orange flesh colour 
in potato (Solanum tuberosum L.). To this end the natural diversity in three 
genes of the carotenoid pathway was assessed by SNP analyses. Association 
analysis was performed between SNP haplotypes and flesh colour phenotypes in 
diploid and tetraploid potato genotypes. We observed that among eleven 
beta-carotene hydroxylase 2 (Chy2) alleles only one dominant allele has a major 
effect, changing white into yellow flesh colour. In contrast, none of the 
lycopene epsilon cyclase (Lcye) alleles seemed to have a large effect on flesh 
colour. Analysis of zeaxanthin epoxidase (Zep) alleles showed that all (diploid) 
genotypes with orange tuber flesh were homozygous for one specific Zep allele. 
This Zep allele showed a reduced level of expression. The complete genomic 
sequence of the recessive Zep allele, including the promoter, was determined, 
and compared with the sequence of other Zep alleles. The most striking 
difference was the presence of a non-LTR retrotransposon sequence in intron 1 of 
the recessive Zep allele, which was absent in all other Zep alleles 
investigated. We hypothesise that the presence of this large sequence in intron 
1 caused the lower expression level, resulting in reduced Zep activity and 
accumulation of zeaxanthin. Only genotypes combining presence of the dominant 
Chy2 allele with homozygosity for the recessive Zep allele produced 
orange-fleshed tubers that accumulated large amounts of zeaxanthin.

DOI: 10.1007/s11103-010-9647-y
PMCID: PMC2898108
PMID: 20490894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2010 Aug;76(15):5199-206. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00263-10.
 Epub 2010 Jun 4.

Redesign, reconstruction, and directed extension of the Brevibacterium linens 
C40 carotenoid pathway in Escherichia coli.

Kim SH(1), Park YH, Schmidt-Dannert C, Lee PC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Science and Technology, Ajou University, 
Woncheon-dong, Yeongtong-gu, Suwon 443-749, South Korea.

In this study, the carotenoid biosynthetic pathways of Brevibacterium linens 
DSMZ 20426 were reconstructed, redesigned, and extended with additional 
carotenoid-modifying enzymes of other sources in a heterologous host Escherichia 
coli. The modular lycopene pathway synthesized an unexpected carotenoid 
structure, 3,4-didehydrolycopene, as well as lycopene. Extension of the novel 
3,4-didehydrolycopene pathway with the mutant Pantoea lycopene cyclase CrtY(2) 
and the Rhodobacter spheroidene monooxygenase CrtA generated monocyclic torulene 
and acyclic oxocarotenoids, respectively. The reconstructed beta-carotene 
pathway synthesized an unexpected 7,8-dihydro-beta-carotene in addition to 
beta-carotene. Extension of the beta-carotene pathway with the B. linens 
beta-ring desaturase CrtU and Pantoea beta-carotene hydroxylase CrtZ generated 
asymmetric carotenoid agelaxanthin A, which had one aromatic ring at the one end 
of carotene backbone and one hydroxyl group at the other end, as well as 
aromatic carotenoid isorenieratene and dihydroxy carotenoid zeaxanthin. These 
results demonstrate that reconstruction of the biosynthetic pathways and 
extension with promiscuous enzymes in a heterologous host holds promise as a 
rational strategy for generating structurally diverse compounds that are hardly 
accessible in nature.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00263-10
PMCID: PMC2916479
PMID: 20525861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Fungal Genet Biol. 2010 Sep;47(9):773-81. doi: 10.1016/j.fgb.2010.05.009.
Epub  2010 May 23.

Protein-DNA interactions in the promoter region of the Phycomyces carB and carRA 
genes correlate with the kinetics of their mRNA accumulation in response to 
light.

Sanz C(1), Benito EP, Orejas M, Alvarez MI, Eslava AP.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Microbiología y Genética, Universidad de Salamanca, Spain.

Carotene biosynthesis in Phycomyces is photoinducible and carried out by 
phytoene dehydrogenase (encoded by carB) and a bifunctional enzyme possessing 
lycopene cyclase and phytoene synthase activities (carRA). A light pulse 
followed by periods of darkness produced similar biphasic responses in the 
expression of the carB and carRA genes, indicating their coordinated regulation. 
Specific binding complexes were formed between the carB-carRA intergenic region 
and protein extracts from wild type mycelia grown in the dark or 8min after 
irradiation. These two conditions correspond to the points at which the 
expression of both genes is minimal, suggesting that these binding complexes are 
involved in the down-regulation of photocarotenogenesis in Phycomyces. Protein 
extracts from carotene mutants failed to form the dark retardation complex, 
suggesting a role of these genes in the regulation of photocarotenogenesis. In 
contrast, protein extracts from phototropic mutants formed dark retardation 
complexes identical to that of the wild type.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fgb.2010.05.009
PMID: 20580936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Plant Biotechnol J. 2011 Apr;9(3):384-93. doi:
10.1111/j.1467-7652.2010.00554.x.  Epub 2010 Aug 29.

Synergistic metabolism in hybrid corn indicates bottlenecks in the carotenoid 
pathway and leads to the accumulation of extraordinary levels of the 
nutritionally important carotenoid zeaxanthin.

Naqvi S(1), Zhu C, Farre G, Sandmann G, Capell T, Christou P.

Author information:
(1)Departament de Produccio Vegetal I Ciencia Forestal, University of Lleida, 
Lleida, Spain.

Lutein and zeaxanthin cannot be synthesized de novo in humans, and although 
lutein is abundant in fruit and vegetables, good dietary sources of zeaxanthin 
are scarce. Certain corn varieties provide adequate amounts because the ratio of 
endosperm β:ε lycopene cyclase activity favours the β-carotene/zeaxanthin branch 
of the carotenoid pathway. We previously described a transgenic corn line 
expressing the early enzymes in the pathway (including lycopene β-cyclase) and 
therefore accumulating extraordinary levels of β-carotene. Here, we demonstrate 
that introgressing the transgenic mini-pathway into wild-type yellow endosperm 
varieties gives rise to hybrids in which the β:ε ratio is altered additively. 
Where the β:ε ratio in the genetic background is high, introgression of the 
mini-pathway allows zeaxanthin production at an unprecedented 56 μg/g dry 
weight. This result shows that metabolic synergy between endogenous and 
heterologous pathways can be used to enhance the levels of nutritionally 
important metabolites.

© 2010 The Authors. Plant Biotechnology Journal © 2010 Society for Experimental 
Biology, Association of Applied Biologists and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7652.2010.00554.x
PMID: 20807370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Physiol Plant. 2011 Jan;141(1):1-10. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-3054.2010.01415.x.
Epub  2010 Oct 26.

Expression and phylogenetic analysis of two new lycopene β-cyclases from Citrus 
paradisi.

Mendes AF(1), Chen C, Gmitter FG Jr, Moore GA, Costa MG.

Author information:
(1)Center for Biotechnology and Genetics, Biological Sciences Department, State 
University of Santa Cruz, Ilhéus, BA 45662-000, Brazil.

Two new lycopene β-cyclases (LCYBs) were cloned and characterized from 
grapefruit (Citrus paradisi Macf.). During fruit ripening, CpLCYB1 expression 
did not show significant differences between 'Flame' (red flesh) and 'Marsh' 
(white flesh), and was much lower than CpLCYB2 and nearly constant; however, 
CpLCYB2 expression dramatically changed in a similar tendency in the pulp of 
both grapefruit cultivars, but the relative abundance of mRNA in 'Flame' was 
significantly lower than in 'Marsh'. Phylogenetically and structurally, CpLCYB1 
was a chloroplast-specific member and CpLCYB2 a chromoplast-specific member, the 
two subfamilies of all the LCYB genes. An intron was found in the 
5'-untranslated region of CpLCYB1 and in two other Citrus LCYB1 genes (CcLCYB1 
and CsLCYB1-2), resulting in an extra 20 amino acids, compared with all the 
other LCYB1s. It suggested that a different genomic event, in addition to gene 
duplication, has contributed to the evolution of these LCYB genes, and likewise, 
the change of their functions.

Copyright © Physiologia Plantarum 2010.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-3054.2010.01415.x
PMID: 20875059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 11;286(10):8666-8676. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.208017.
Epub  2011 Jan 5.

Plant carotene cis-trans isomerase CRTISO: a new member of the 
FAD(RED)-dependent flavoproteins catalyzing non-redox reactions.

Yu Q(1), Ghisla S(2), Hirschberg J(3), Mann V(3), Beyer P(4).

Author information:
(1)From the Faculty of Biology, Centre for Biological Signaling Studies (Bioss), 
University of Freiburg, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.
(2)the Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, D-78457 Konstanz, Germany 
and.
(3)the Department of Genetics, the Alexander Silberman Life Science Institute, 
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 91904 Jerusalem, Israel.
(4)From the Faculty of Biology, Centre for Biological Signaling Studies (Bioss), 
University of Freiburg, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany,. Electronic address: 
peter.beyer@biologie.uni-freiburg.de.

The carotene cis-trans isomerase CRTISO is a constituent of the carotene 
desaturation pathway as evolved in cyanobacteria and prevailing in plants, in 
which a tetra-cis-lycopene species, termed prolycopene, is formed. CRTISO, an 
evolutionary descendant of the bacterial carotene desaturase CRTI, catalyzes the 
cis-to-trans isomerization reactions leading to all-trans-lycopene, the 
substrate for the subsequent lycopene cyclization to form 
all-trans-α/β-carotene. CRTISO and CRTI share a dinucleotide binding motif at 
the N terminus. Here we report that this site is occupied by FAD in CRTISO. The 
reduced form of this cofactor catalyzes a reaction not involving net redox 
changes. Results obtained with C(1)- and C(5)-deaza-FAD suggest mechanistic 
similarities with type II isopentenyl diphosphate: dimethylallyl diphosphate 
isomerase (IDI-2). CRTISO, together with lycopene cyclase CRTY and IDI-2, thus 
represents the third enzyme in isoprenoid metabolism belonging to the class of 
non-redox enzymes depending on reduced flavin for activity. The regional 
specificity and the kinetics of the isomerization reaction were investigated in 
vitro using purified enzyme and biphasic liposome-based systems carrying 
specific cis-configured lycopene species as substrates. The reaction proceeded 
from cis to trans, recognizing half-sides of the symmetrical prolycopene and was 
accompanied by one trans-to-cis isomerization step specific for the C(5)-C(6) 
double bond. Rice lycopene β-cyclase (OsLCY-b), when additionally introduced 
into the biphasic in vitro system used, was found to be stereospecific for 
all-trans-lycopene and allowed the CRTISO reaction to proceed toward completion 
by modifying the thermodynamics of the overall reaction.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.208017
PMCID: PMC3048748
PMID: 21209101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Plant Cell Physiol. 2011 May;52(5):909-21. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcr043. Epub
2011  Apr 6.

Transformation of beta-lycopene cyclase genes from Salicornia europaea and 
Arabidopsis conferred salt tolerance in Arabidopsis and tobacco.

Chen X(1), Han H, Jiang P, Nie L, Bao H, Fan P, Lv S, Feng J, Li Y.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Plant Resources, Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing 100093, PR China.

Inhibition of lycopene cyclization decreased the salt tolerance of the 
euhalophyte Salicornia europaea L. We isolated a β-lycopene cyclase gene SeLCY 
from S. europaea and transformed it into Arabidopsis with stable expression. 
Transgenic Arabidopsis on post-germination exhibited enhanced tolerance to 
oxidative and salt stress. After 8 and 21 d recovery from 200 mM NaCl treatment, 
transgenic lines had a higher survival ratio than wild-type (WT) plants. 
Three-week-old transgenic plants treated with 200 mM NaCl showed better growth 
than the WT with higher photosystem activity and less H(2)O(2) accumulation. 
Determination of endogenous pigments of Arabidopsis treated with 200 mM NaCl for 
0, 2 or 4 d demonstrated that the transgenic plants retained higher contents of 
carotenoids than the WT. Furthermore, to compare the difference between SeLCY 
and AtLCY from Arabidopsis, we used viral vector mediating ectopic expression of 
SeLCY and AtLCY in Nicotiana benthamiana. Although LCY genes transformation 
increased the salt tolerance in tobacco, there is no significant difference 
between SeLCY- and AtLCY-transformed plants. These findings indicate that SeLCY 
transgenic Arabidopsis improved salt tolerance by increasing synthesis of 
carotenoids, which impairs reactive oxygen species and protects the 
photosynthesis system under salt stress, and as a single gene, SeLCY 
functionally showed no advantage for salt tolerance improvement compared with 
AtLCY.

DOI: 10.1093/pcp/pcr043
PMID: 21471119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2011 Nov;92(4):769-77. doi: 
10.1007/s00253-011-3488-8. Epub 2011 Jul 27.

cDNA cloning of a novel gene codifying for the enzyme lycopene β-cyclase from 
Ficus carica and its expression in Escherichia coli.

Araya-Garay JM(1), Feijoo-Siota L, Veiga-Crespo P, Villa TG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Santiago de Compostela, 15782 
Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

Lycopene beta-cyclase (β-LCY) is the key enzyme that modifies the linear 
lycopene molecule into cyclic β-carotene, an indispensable carotenoid of the 
photosynthetic apparatus and an important source of vitamin A in human and 
animal nutrition. Owing to its antioxidant activity, it is commercially used in 
the cosmetic and pharmaceutical industries, as well as an additive in 
foodstuffs. Therefore, β-carotene has a large share of the carotenoidic market. 
In this study, we used reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) 
and rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE)-PCR to obtain and clone a cDNA copy 
of the gene Lyc-β from Ficus carica (Lyc-β Fc), which codes for the enzyme 
lycopene β-cyclase (β-LCY). Expression of this gene in Escherichia coli produced 
a single polypeptide of 56 kDa of weight, containing 496 amino acids, that was 
able to cycle both ends of the lycopene chain. Amino acid analysis revealed that 
the protein contained several conserved plant cyclase motifs. β-LCY activity was 
revealed by heterologous complementation analysis, with lycopene being converted 
to β-carotene as a result of the enzyme's action. The β-LCY activity of the 
expressed protein was confirmed by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) 
identification of the β-carotene. The lycopene to β-carotene conversion rate was 
90%. The experiments carried out in this work showed that β-LYC is the enzyme 
responsible for converting lycopene, an acyclic carotene, to β-carotene, a 
bicyclic carotene in F. carica. Therefore, by cloning and expressing β-LCY in E. 
coli, we have obtained a new gene for β-carotene production or as part of the 
biosynthetic pathway of astaxanthin. So far, this is the first and only gene of 
the carotenoid pathway identified in F. carica.

© Springer-Verlag 2011

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-011-3488-8
PMID: 21792589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Z Naturforsch C J Biosci. 2011 May-Jun;66(5-6):283-6. doi: 
10.1515/znc-2011-5-612.

Expression of carotenogenic genes and astaxanthin production in 
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous as a function of oxygen tension.

Wu W(1), Lu M, Yu L.

Author information:
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and 
Technology, Wuhan 430074, PR China.

This report gives an insight into the specific changes in the transcription of 
four key carotenogenic genes [encoding geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase 
(crtE), phytoene desaturase (crtI), phytoene synthase lycopene cyclase (crtYB), 
and astaxanthin synthase (ast), respectively] in Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous 
cultures, with regard to dissolved oxygen (DO) contents of 10%, 25%, and 40% air 
saturation, respectively. 25% DO proved to be the most beneficial for yeast 
growth, transcription of carotenogenic genes, and astaxanthin content.

DOI: 10.1515/znc-2011-5-612
PMID: 21812346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


150. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23102. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023102. Epub 2011 Aug
9.

Functional analysis of the Phycomyces carRA gene encoding the enzymes phytoene 
synthase and lycopene cyclase.

Sanz C(1), Velayos A, Álvarez MI, Benito EP, Eslava AP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Genetics, University of Salamanca, Salamanca, 
Spain. catsof@usal.es

Phycomyces carRA gene encodes a protein with two domains. Domain R is 
characterized by red carR mutants that accumulate lycopene. Domain A is 
characterized by white carA mutants that do not accumulate significant amounts 
of carotenoids. The carRA-encoded protein was identified as the lycopene cyclase 
and phytoene synthase enzyme by sequence homology with other proteins. However, 
no direct data showing the function of this protein have been reported so far. 
Different Mucor circinelloides mutants altered at the phytoene synthase, the 
lycopene cyclase or both activities were transformed with the Phycomyces carRA 
gene. Fully transcribed carRA mRNA molecules were detected by Northern assays in 
the transformants and the correct processing of the carRA messenger was verified 
by RT-PCR. These results showed that Phycomyces carRA gene was correctly 
expressed in Mucor. Carotenoids analysis in these transformants showed the 
presence of ß-carotene, absent in the untransformed strains, providing 
functional evidence that the Phycomyces carRA gene complements the M. 
circinelloides mutations. Co-transformation of the carRA cDNA in E. coli with 
different combinations of the carotenoid structural genes from Erwinia uredovora 
was also performed. Newly formed carotenoids were accumulated showing that the 
Phycomyces CarRA protein does contain lycopene cyclase and phytoene synthase 
activities. The heterologous expression of the carRA gene and the functional 
complementation of the mentioned activities are not very efficient in E. coli. 
However, the simultaneous presence of both carRA and carB gene products from 
Phycomyces increases the efficiency of these enzymes, presumably due to an 
interaction mechanism.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023102
PMCID: PMC3153474
PMID: 21858003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


151. Bioprocess Biosyst Eng. 2012 May;35(4):553-64. doi:
10.1007/s00449-011-0628-6.  Epub 2011 Sep 25.

Optimization of the mated fermentation process for the production of lycopene by 
Blakeslea trispora NRRL 2895 (+) and NRRL 2896 (-).

Wang JF(1), Liu XJ, Liu RS, Li HM, Tang YJ.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Fermentation Engineering (Ministry of Education), Hubei 
University of Technology, Wuhan, China.

The mated fermentation process for the production of lycopene by Blakeslea 
trispora NRRL 2895 (+) and NRRL 2896 (-) was systematically optimized in shake 
flasks. The ratio of the (+) to (-) strains, the lycopene cyclase inhibitors 
piperidine and creatinine, the trisporic acid structural analog abscisic acid, 
the 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) precursor leucine, and the 
mevalonate kinase enhancer penicillin were all identified as key factors 
affecting lycopene biosynthesis. With an optimal ratio of 5:1 for the (+) to (-) 
strains and the addition of 6 g/L creatinine on day 3, the highest lycopene 
production was 98.1 ± 15.5 mg/L. Based on the above result, the addition of 0.1 
g/L penicillin on day 4, 150 μmol/L abscisic acid on day 3 or 0.5 g/L leucine on 
day 4 enhanced lycopene production to 119.7 ± 17.2, 120.6 ± 12.3 and 135.2 ± 7.0 
mg/L, respectively. Finally, an integrated strategy by combining the above key 
factors was developed, and the highest lycopene production of 156.2 ± 15.4 mg/L 
was obtained, which was enhanced by 134.9% comparing with its production of 66.5 
± 3.6 mg/L before the optimization process of this work. The results obtained in 
this study may be useful for large-scale industrial lycopene production.

DOI: 10.1007/s00449-011-0628-6
PMID: 21947673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2011 Jul;27(7):990-7.

[Cloning of Blakeslea trispora carRA gene by PCR-driven overlap extension and 
construction of an activity detection system].

[Article in Chinese]

Tang H(1), Shi N, Yu M, Liu L, Liu J, Jia Y, Niu H, Zhang L.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Microbial Diversity Research and Application of Hebei 
Province, College of Life Sciences, Hebei University, Baoding 071002, China.

Blakeslea trispora CarRA has both lycopene cyclase and phytoene synthase 
activity. In order to analyze the double functional activity of CarRA proteins 
and to detect the active sites of lycopene cyclase, we constructed two detection 
systems in Escherichia coli by color complementary. Through PCR-driven overlap 
extension we got carRA gene cDNA, then constructed prokaryotes expression vector 
pET28a-carRA. pET28a-carRA with plasmid pAC-LYC carrying crtl/crtB/crtE gene 
clusters were co-transformed to BL21(DE3) to validate lycopene cyclase activity. 
We constructed the plasmid pAC-LYC delta (crtB) carrying crtl/crtE gene 
clusters, then co-transtormed them with pET28a-carRA to BL21(DE3) to validate 
phytoene synthase activity. Based on color complementary, and HPLC analysis of 
metabolites, we confirmed that the CarRA protein activity detection system was 
reliable. Our study provides a screening model for specific mutation of lycopene 
cyclase without affecting phytoene synthase activity.

PMID: 22016982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Geobiology. 2012 May;10(3):205-15. doi: 10.1111/j.1472-4669.2011.00297.x.
Epub  2011 Oct 3.

Biosynthesis of the biomarker okenone: χ-ring formation.

Vogl K(1), Bryant DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park, PA, USA.

Purple sulfur bacteria (PSB) mainly occur in anoxic aquatic and benthic 
environments, where they play important roles in cycling carbon and sulfur. Many 
PSB characteristically produce the unique keto-carotenoid, okenone, which is 
important not only for its light absorption and photoprotection properties but 
also because of its diagenesis product, okenane, which is a biomarker for 
ancient sediments derived from anoxic environments. The specific methylation 
pattern of the χ-ring of okenane is unlikely to be formed by diagenetic 
processes and should therefore reflect an enzymatic activity from okenone 
biosynthesis. This study describes two enzymes that produce the χ-ring of 
okenone, the only structural element of okenone preserved in okenane. Genes 
encoding enzymes of carotenogenesis were identified in the draft genome sequence 
of an okenone-producing PSB, Thiodictyon sp. strain CAD16. Two divergently 
transcribed genes encoded a CrtY-type lycopene cyclase and a CrtU/CruE-type 
γ-carotene desaturase/methyltransferase. Expression of crtY in Escherichia coli 
showed that this gene encoded a lycopene cyclase that produced γ-carotene as the 
only product. Although the sequence of the γ-carotene 
desaturase/methyltransferase was more similar to CrtU sequences of green sulfur 
bacteria than to CruE sequences of cyanobacteria, expression of the crtU gene in 
Chlorobaculum tepidum showed that the enzyme produced carotenoids with χ-rings 
rather than φ-rings. Phylogenetic analysis of the carotene 
desaturase/methyltransferases revealed that enzymes capable of converting 
β-rings to χ-rings have independently evolved at least two times. These results 
indicate that it probably will not be possible to deduce the activity of 
carotene desaturase/methyltransferases solely from sequence data.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1472-4669.2011.00297.x
PMID: 22070388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Phytochemistry. 2012 Feb;74:69-78. doi: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2011.11.003.
Epub  2011 Dec 10.

Down-regulation of β-carotene hydroxylase increases β-carotene and total 
carotenoids enhancing salt stress tolerance in transgenic cultured cells of 
sweetpotato.

Kim SH(1), Ahn YO, Ahn MJ, Lee HS, Kwak SS.

Author information:
(1)Environmental Biotechnology Research Center, Korea Research Institute of 
Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea.

Sweetpotato (Ipomoea batatas Lam.) is an important industrial crop and source of 
food that contains useful components, including antioxidants such as 
carotenoids. β-Carotene hydroxylase (CHY-β) is a key regulatory enzyme in the 
beta-beta-branch of carotenoid biosynthesis and it catalyzes hydroxylation into 
both β-carotene to β-cryptoxanthin and β-cryptoxanthin to zeaxanthin. To 
increase the β-carotene content of sweetpotato through the inhibition of further 
hydroxylation of β-carotene, the effects of silencing CHY-β in the carotenoid 
biosynthetic pathway were evaluated. A partial cDNA encoding CHY-β was cloned 
from the storage roots of orange-fleshed sweetpotato (cv. Shinhwangmi) to 
generate an RNA interference-IbCHY-β construct. This construct was introduced 
into cultured cells of white-fleshed sweetpotato (cv. Yulmi). Reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis confirmed the successful 
suppression of IbCHY-β gene expression in transgenic cultured cells. The 
expression level of phytoene synthase and lycopene β-cyclase increased, whereas 
the expression of other genes showed no detectable change. Down-regulation of 
IbCHY-β gene expression changed the composition and levels of carotenoids 
between non-transgenic (NT) and transgenic cells. In transgenic line #7, the 
total carotenoid content reached a maximum of 117 μg/g dry weight, of which 
β-carotene measured 34.43 μg/g dry weight. In addition, IbCHY-β-silenced calli 
showed elevated β-cryptoxanthin and zeaxanthin contents as well as high 
transcript level P450 gene. The 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl radical scavenging 
activity (DPPH) in transgenic cells was more than twice that in NT cells. 
RNA-IbCHY-β calli increased abscisic acid (ABA) content, which was accompanied 
by enhanced tolerance to salt stress. In addition, the production of reactive 
oxygen species measured by 3,3'-diaminobenzidine (DAB) staining was 
significantly decreased in transgenic cultured cells under salt stress. Taken 
together, the present results indicate that down-regulation of IbCHY-β increased 
β-carotene contents and total carotenoids in transgenic plant cells and enhanced 
their antioxidant capacity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2011.11.003
PMID: 22154923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Phytochemistry. 2012 Apr;76:40-5. doi: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2011.12.017. Epub
 2012 Jan 24.

Carotenoid synthesis and phytoene synthase activity during mating of Blakeslea 
trispora.

Breitenbach J(1), Fraser PD, Sandmann G.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biosciences 213, JW Goethe Universität, Frankfurt, Germany.

Carotenoid formation was investigated in wild type and carotenogenic mutants of 
Blakeslea trispora after mating (-) and (+) strains. The highest yields of 
carotenoids, especially β-carotene was observed following mating. In vitro 
incorporation of geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate into phytoene and β-carotene 
corresponded to increased carotenogenesis in the mated strains. Immuno 
determination of phytoene synthase protein levels revealed that the amounts of 
this enzyme is concurrent with the increases in carotenoid content. In fungi, 
phytoene synthase together with lycopene cyclase are encoded by a fusion gene 
crtYB or carRA with two individual domains. These domains were both 
heterologously expressed in an independent manner and antisera raised against 
both. These antisera were used, to assess protein levels in mated and non-mated 
B. trispora. The phytoene synthase domain was detected as an individual soluble 
protein with a molecular weight of 40 kDa and the lycopene cyclase an individual 
protein of mass about 30 kDa present in the membrane fraction following 
sub-cellular fractionation. This result demonstrates a post-translational 
cleavage of the protein transcribed from a single mRNA into independent 
functional phytoene synthase and lycopene cyclase.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2011.12.017
PMID: 22281381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


156. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e32221. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032221. Epub 2012 Feb
24.

Effect of the citrus lycopene β-cyclase transgene on carotenoid metabolism in 
transgenic tomato fruits.

Guo F(1), Zhou W, Zhang J, Xu Q, Deng X.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Biology of Ministry of Education, 
Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China.

Lycopene β-cyclase (LYCB) is the key enzyme for the synthesis of β-carotene, a 
valuable component of the human diet. In this study, tomato constitutively 
express Lycb-1 was engineered. The β-carotene level of transformant increased 
4.1 fold, and the total carotenoid content increased by 30% in the fruits. In 
the transgenic line, the downstream α-branch metabolic fluxes were repressed 
during the three developmental stages while α-carotene content increased in the 
ripe stage. Microarray analysis in the ripe stage revealed that the constitutive 
expression of Lycb-1 affected a number of pathways including the synthesis of 
fatty acids, flavonoids and phenylpropanoids, the degradation of limonene and 
pinene, starch and sucrose metabolism and photosynthesis. This study provided 
insight into the regulatory effect of Lycb-1 gene on plant carotenoid metabolism 
and fruit transcriptome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032221
PMCID: PMC3286453
PMID: 22384184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


157. Gene. 2012 Jul 15;503(1):147-51. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.04.059. Epub 2012
May  2.

Isolation and characterization of a muskmelon cDNA encoding Lycopene 
Beta-cyclase.

Hao H(1), Ma L, Cong H, Li Q, Yu X.

Author information:
(1)College of Horticulture Science and Engineering, Shandong Agricultural 
University, Tai'an, China.

Lycopene Beta-cyclase (LCY-B) is thought to play a critical role in 
Beta-carotene synthesis in fruit. A full-length cDNA clone encoding Lycopene 
Beta-cyclase was isolated from muskmelon (Cucumis melo L.) by RT-PCR and RACE. 
The clone, designated CmLcyb1, contains 1871 nucleotides, with an open reading 
frame of 1512 nucleotides. The deduced 504-amino-acid sequence showed high 
identities with other plant Lycopene Beta-cyclases. Real time quantitative 
RT-PCR analysis indicated that CmLcyb1 was expressed in all tissues and organs 
of muskmelon inbred M01-3 with white mesocarp and, 'Homoka', an orange mesocarp 
cultivar. The expression levels of CmLcyb1 in roots, stems, leaves and flowers 
in the two genotypes differed little. The expression level was highest in mature 
fruit of 'Homoka' and was much higher than that in mature fruit of M01-3. 
Moreover, the mRNA level of CmLcyb1 was very low in fruits before fruit-size 
fixation and increased dramatically in the size-fixed fruits of these two 
genotypes. The mRNA levels of CmLcyb1 during fruit development of 'Homoka' were 
all higher than those of M01-3. Interestingly, Beta-carotene content showed 
almost the same change trend as mRNA levels during fruit development in these 
two genotypes, suggesting that Beta-carotene accumulation may be linked to the 
CmLcyb1 transcript level in muskmelon fruit.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.04.059
PMID: 22575730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jul 3;109(27):E1888-97. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1206002109. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

Lycopene cyclase paralog CruP protects against reactive oxygen species in 
oxygenic photosynthetic organisms.

Bradbury LM(1), Shumskaya M, Tzfadia O, Wu SB, Kennelly EJ, Wurtzel ET.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Lehman College, City University of New 
York, West, Bronx, NY 10468, USA.

In photosynthetic organisms, carotenoids serve essential roles in photosynthesis 
and photoprotection. A previous report designated CruP as a secondary lycopene 
cyclase involved in carotenoid biosynthesis [Maresca J, et al. (2007) Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA 104:11784-11789]. However, we found that cruP KO or cruP 
overexpression plants do not exhibit correspondingly reduced or increased 
production of cyclized carotenoids, which would be expected if CruP was a 
lycopene cyclase. Instead, we show that CruP aids in preventing accumulation of 
reactive oxygen species (ROS), thereby reducing accumulation of 
β-carotene-5,6-epoxide, a ROS-catalyzed autoxidation product, and inhibiting 
accumulation of anthocyanins, which are known chemical indicators of ROS. Plants 
with a nonfunctional cruP accumulate substantially higher levels of ROS and 
β-carotene-5,6-epoxide in green tissues. Plants overexpressing cruP show reduced 
levels of ROS, β-carotene-5,6-epoxide, and anthocyanins. The observed 
up-regulation of cruP transcripts under photoinhibitory and lipid 
peroxidation-inducing conditions, such as high light stress, cold stress, 
anoxia, and low levels of CO(2), fits with a role for CruP in mitigating the 
effects of ROS. Phylogenetic distribution of CruP in prokaryotes showed that the 
gene is only present in cyanobacteria that live in habitats characterized by 
large variation in temperature and inorganic carbon availability. Therefore, 
CruP represents a unique target for developing resilient plants and algae needed 
to supply food and biofuels in the face of global climate change.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1206002109
PMCID: PMC3390835
PMID: 22706644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


159. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;898:109-22. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-918-1_6.

Gene fusions for the directed modification of the carotenoid biosynthesis 
pathway in Mucor circinelloides.

Iturriaga EA(1), Papp T, Alvarez MI, Eslava AP.

Author information:
(1)Área de Genética, Departamento de Microbiología y Genética, University of 
Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. iturri@usal.es

Several fungal species, particularly some included in the Mucorales, have been 
used to develop fermentation processes for the production of β-carotene. 
Oxygenated derivatives of β-carotene are more valuable products, and the 
preference by the market of carotenoids from biological sources has increased 
the research in different carotenoid-producing organisms. We currently use Mucor 
circinelloides as a model organism to develop strains able to produce new, more 
valuable, and with an increased content of carotenoids. In this chapter we 
describe part of our efforts to construct active gene fusions which could 
advance in the diversification of carotenoid production by this fungus. The main 
carotenoid accumulated by M. circinelloides is β-carotene, although it has some 
hydroxylase activity and produces low amounts of zeaxanthin. Two enzymatic 
activities are required for the production of astaxanthin from β-carotene: a 
hydroxylase and a ketolase. We used the ctrW gene of Paracoccus sp. N81106, 
encoding a bacterial β-carotene ketolase, to construct gene fusions with two 
fungal genes essential for the modification of the pathway in M. circinelloides. 
First we fused it to the carRP gene of M. circinelloides, which is responsible 
for the phytoene synthase and lycopene cyclase activities in this fungus. The 
expected activity of this fusion gene would be the accumulation by M. 
circinelloides of canthaxanthin and probably some astaxanthin. A second 
construction was the fusion of the crtW gene of Paracoccus sp. to the crtS gene 
of Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous, responsible for the synthesis of astaxanthin 
from β-carotene in this fungus, but which was shown to have only hydroxylase 
activity in M. circinelloides. The expected result in M. circinelloides 
transformants was the accumulation of astaxanthin. Here we describe a detailed 
and empirically tested protocol for the construction of these gene fusions.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-61779-918-1_6
PMID: 22711120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Planta. 2012 Oct;236(4):1315-25. doi: 10.1007/s00425-012-1690-2. Epub 2012
Jun  24.

Expression and functional analysis of two lycopene β-cyclases from citrus 
fruits.

Zhang L(1), Ma G, Shirai Y, Kato M, Yamawaki K, Ikoma Y, Matsumoto H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Agriculture, 
Shizuoka University, 836 Ohya, Suruga, Shizuoka 422-8529, Japan.

In the present study, two LCYb genes (CitLCYb1 and CitLCYb2) were isolated from 
Satsuma mandarin (Citrus unshiu Marc.), Valencia orange (Citrus sinensis Osbeck) 
and Lisbon lemon (Citrus limon Burm.f.) and their functions were analyzed by the 
color complementation assay in lycopene-accumulating E. coli cells. The results 
showed that CitLCYb1 and CitLCYb2 shared high identity at the amino acid level 
among the three citrus varieties. The N-terminal region of the two proteins 
encoded by CitLCYb1 and CitLCYb2 was predicted to contain a 51-residue 
chloroplastic transit peptide, which shared low similarity. In Satsuma mandarin, 
the secondary structures of the CitLCYb1 and CitLCYb2 encoding proteins without 
the transit peptide were quite similar. Moreover, functional analysis showed 
that both enzymes of CitLCYb1 and CitLCYb2 participated in the formation of 
β-carotene, and when they were co-expressed with CitLCYe, α-carotene could be 
produced from lycopene in E. coli cells. However, although CitLCYb2 could 
convert lycopene to α-carotene in E. coli cells, its extremely low level of 
expression indicated that CitLCYb2 did not participate in the formation of 
α-carotene during the green stage in the flavedo. In addition, the high 
expression levels of CitLCYb1 and CitLCYb2 during the orange stage played an 
important role in the accumulation of β,β-xanthophylls in citrus fruits. The 
results presented in this study might contribute to elucidate the mechanism of 
carotenoid accumulation in citrus fruits.

DOI: 10.1007/s00425-012-1690-2
PMID: 22729824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


161. FEBS Lett. 2012 Sep 21;586(19):3415-20. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.07.060.
Epub  2012 Jul 31.

Reaction specificities of the ε-ionone-forming lycopene cyclase from rice (Oryza 
sativa) elucidated in vitro.

Yu Q(1), Beyer P.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Biology, Centre for Biological Signaling Studies (BIOSS), 
University of Freiburg, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

Lycopene cyclases responsible for the formation of ε-ionone rings (LCYe) mark a 
plant-specific bifurcation of carotenogenesis. We investigated purified rice 
LCYe (OsLCYe) in a liposome-based biphasic assay system. OsLCYe depends on 
reduced flavin cofactors stabilizing a transient state formed during the 
non-redox cyclization reaction. In contrast to OsLCYb, OsLCYe produces 
predominantly monocyclic products and monocyclic carotene intermediates are not 
suitable substrates. Determination of the OsLCYe reaction specificities and the 
combined use of OsLCYb allow the characterization of the reaction sequence 
leading to heterocyclic carotenoids. It was also found that 5-cis-lycopene, 
which was thought to be decisive for ε-cyclization, was not involved in the 
reaction, with OsLCYe acting as an exclusion filter for this naturally occurring 
isomer.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.07.060
PMID: 22874758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Exp Bot. 2012 Sep;63(15):5607-12. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ers211. Epub 2012 Aug
9.

Biosynthesis of fucoxanthin and diadinoxanthin and function of initial pathway 
genes in Phaeodactylum tricornutum.

Dambek M(1), Eilers U, Breitenbach J, Steiger S, Büchel C, Sandmann G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Bioscience, J.W. Goethe University Frankfurt, 
Germany.

The biosynthesis pathway to diadinoxanthin and fucoxanthin was elucidated in 
Phaeodactylum tricornutum by a combined approach involving metabolite analysis 
identification of gene function. For the initial steps leading to β-carotene, 
putative genes were selected from the genomic database and the function of 
several of them identified by genetic pathway complementation in Escherichia 
coli. They included genes encoding a phytoene synthase, a phytoene desaturase, a 
ζ-carotene desaturase, and a lycopene β-cyclase. Intermediates of the pathway 
beyond β-carotene, present in trace amounts, were separated by TLC and 
identified as violaxanthin and neoxanthin in the enriched fraction. Neoxanthin 
is a branching point for the synthesis of both diadinoxanthin and fucoxanthin 
and the mechanisms for their formation were proposed. A single isomerization of 
one of the allenic double bounds in neoxanthin yields diadinoxanhin. Two 
reactions, hydroxylation at C8 in combination with a keto-enol tautomerization 
and acetylation of the 3'-HO group results in the formation of fucoxanthin.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/ers211
PMCID: PMC3444273
PMID: 22888128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Physiol Plant. 2013 Apr;147(4):432-42. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-3054.2012.01688.x.  Epub 2012 Oct 1.

Downregulation of the lycopene ε-cyclase gene increases carotenoid synthesis via 
the β-branch-specific pathway and enhances salt-stress tolerance in sweetpotato 
transgenic calli.

Kim SH(1), Kim YH, Ahn YO, Ahn MJ, Jeong JC, Lee HS, Kwak SS.

Author information:
(1)Environmental Biotechnology Research Center, Korea Research Institute of 
Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), 125 Gwahak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, South 
Korea.

Lycopene ε-cyclase (LCY-ε) is involved in the first step of the α-branch 
synthesis pathway of carotenoids from lycopene in plants. In this study, to 
enhance carotenoid synthesis via the β-branch-specific pathway [which yields 
β-carotene and abscisic acid (ABA)] in sweet potato, the expression of IbLCY-ε 
was downregulated by RNAi (RNA interference) technology. The RNAi-IbLCY-ε vector 
was constructed using a partial cDNA of sweet potato LCY-ε isolated from the 
storage root and introduced into cultured sweet potato cells by 
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation. Both semi-quantitative Reverse 
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) of carotenoid biosynthesis 
genes and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis of the 
metabolites in transgenic calli, in which the LCY- εgene was silenced, showed 
the activation of β-branch carotenoids and its related genes. In the transgenic 
calli, the β-carotene content was approximately 21-fold higher than in control 
calli, whereas the lutein content of the transgenic calli was reduced to levels 
undetectable by HPLC. Similarly, expression of the RNAi-IbLCY-ε transgene 
resulted in a twofold increase in ABA content compared to control calli. The 
transgenic calli showed significant tolerance of 200 mM NaCl. Furthermore, both 
the β-branch carotenoids content and the expression levels of various 
branch-specific genes were higher under salt stress than in control calli. These 
results suggest that, in sweet potato, downregulation of the ε-cyclization of 
lycopene increases carotenoid synthesis via the β-branch-specific pathway and 
may positively regulate cellular defenses against salt-mediated oxidative 
stress.

Copyright © Physiologia Plantarum 2012.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-3054.2012.01688.x
PMID: 22938023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Plant Cell Physiol. 2012 Nov;53(11):1881-8. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcs126. Epub
2012  Sep 11.

Opposite chirality of α-carotene in unusual cyanobacteria with unique 
chlorophylls, Acaryochloris and Prochlorococcus.

Takaichi S(1), Mochimaru M, Uchida H, Murakami A, Hirose E, Maoka T, Tsuchiya T, 
Mimuro M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Nippon Medical School, Kawasaki, 211-0063 Japan. 
takaichi@nms.ac.jp

Among all photosynthetic and non-photosynthetic prokaryotes, only cyanobacterial 
species belonging to the genera Acaryochloris and Prochlorococcus have been 
reported to synthesize α-carotene. We reviewed the carotenoids, including their 
chirality, in unusual cyanobacteria containing diverse Chls. Predominantly Chl 
d-containing Acaryochloris (two strains) and divinyl-Chl a and divinyl-Chl 
b-containing Prochlorococcus (three strains) contained β-carotene and zeaxanthin 
as well as α-carotene, whereas Chl b-containing Prochlorothrix (one strain) and 
Prochloron (three isolates) contained only β-carotene and zeaxanthin but no 
α-carotene as in other cyanobacteria. Thus, the capability to synthesize 
α-carotene seemed to have been acquired only by Acaryochloris and 
Prochlorococcus. In addition, we unexpectedly found that α-carotene in both 
cyanobacteria had the opposite chirality at C-6': (6'S)-chirality in 
Acaryochloris and normal (6'R)-chirality in Prochlorococcus, as reported in some 
green algae and land plants. The results represent the first evidence for the 
natural occurrence and biosynthesis of (6'S)-α-carotene. All the zeaxanthins in 
these species were of the usual (3R,3'R)-chirality. Therefore, based on the 
identification of the carotenoids and genome sequence data, we propose a 
biosynthetic pathway for the carotenoids, particularly α-carotene, including the 
participating genes and enzymes.

DOI: 10.1093/pcp/pcs126
PMID: 22968452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Plant Cell Physiol. 2012 Nov;53(11):1899-912. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcs128. Epub
2012  Sep 24.

Cloning and functional characterization of a gene for capsanthin-capsorubin 
synthase from tiger lily (Lilium lancifolium Thunb. 'Splendens').

Jeknić Z(1), Morré JT, Jeknić S, Jevremović S, Subotić A, Chen TH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Horticulture, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, 
USA.

The orange color of tiger lily (Lolium lancifolium 'Splendens') flowers is due, 
primarily, to the accumulation of two κ-xanthophylls, capsanthin and capsorubin. 
An enzyme, known as capsanthin-capsorubin synthase (CCS), catalyzes the 
conversion of antheraxanthin and violaxanthin into capsanthin and capsorubin, 
respectively. We cloned the gene for capsanthin-capsorubin synthase (Llccs) from 
flower tepals of L. lancifolium by the rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) 
with a heterologous non-degenerate primer that was based on the sequence of a 
gene for lycopene β-cyclase (lcyB). The full-length cDNA of Llccs was 1,785 bp 
long and contained an open reading frame of 1,425 bp that encoded a polypeptide 
of 474 amino acids with a predicted N-terminal plastid-targeting sequence. 
Analysis by reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) revealed that expression of Llccs 
was spatially and temporally regulated, with expression in flower buds and 
flowers of L. lancifolium but not in vegetative tissues. Stable overexpression 
of the Llccs gene in callus tissue of Iris germanica, which accumulates several 
xanthophylls including violaxanthin, the precursor of capsorubin, resulted in 
transgenic callus whose color had changed from its normal yellow to red-orange. 
This novel red-orange coloration was due to the accumulation of two non-native 
κ-xanthophylls, capsanthin and capsorubin, as confirmed by HPLC and 
ultraperformance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS) 
analysis with authentic standards. Cloning of the Llccs gene should advance our 
understanding of the molecular and genetic mechanisms of the biosynthesis of 
κ-carotenoids in general and in the genus Lilium in particular, and will 
facilitate transgenic alterations of the colors of flowers and fruits of many 
plant species.

DOI: 10.1093/pcp/pcs128
PMCID: PMC3494009
PMID: 23008421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Plant Physiol. 2012 Aug;159(4):1745-58. doi: 10.1104/pp.112.201137.

The Arabidopsis szl1 mutant reveals a critical role of β-carotene in photosystem 
I photoprotection.

Cazzaniga S(1), Li Z, Niyogi KK, Bassi R, Dall'Osto L.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie, Università di Verona, Verona 37134 Italy.

Carotenes and their oxygenated derivatives, the xanthophylls, are structural 
determinants in both photosystems (PS) I and II. They bind and stabilize 
photosynthetic complexes, increase the light-harvesting capacity of 
chlorophyll-binding proteins, and have a major role in chloroplast 
photoprotection. Localization of carotenoid species within each PS is highly 
conserved: Core complexes bind carotenes, whereas peripheral light-harvesting 
systems bind xanthophylls. The specific functional role of each xanthophyll 
species has been recently described by genetic dissection, however the in vivo 
role of carotenes has not been similarly defined. Here, we have analyzed the 
function of carotenes in photosynthesis and photoprotection, distinct from that 
of xanthophylls, by characterizing the suppressor of zeaxanthin-less (szl) 
mutant of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) which, due to the decreased 
activity of the lycopene-β-cyclase, shows a lower carotene content than 
wild-type plants. When grown at room temperature, mutant plants showed a lower 
content in PSI light-harvesting complex I complex than the wild type, and a 
reduced capacity for chlorophyll fluorescence quenching, the rapidly reversible 
component of nonphotochemical quenching. When exposed to high light at chilling 
temperature, szl1 plants showed stronger photoxidation than wild-type plants. 
Both PSI and PSII from szl1 were similarly depleted in carotenes and yet PSI 
activity was more sensitive to light stress than PSII as shown by the stronger 
photoinhibition of PSI and increased rate of singlet oxygen release from 
isolated PSI light-harvesting complex I complexes of szl1 compared with the wild 
type. We conclude that carotene depletion in the core complexes impairs 
photoprotection of both PS under high light at chilling temperature, with PSI 
being far more affected than PSII.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.112.201137
PMCID: PMC3425210
PMID: 23029671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Theor Appl Genet. 2013 Feb;126(2):389-99. doi: 10.1007/s00122-012-1987-3.
Epub  2012 Oct 2.

Validation of the effects of molecular marker polymorphisms in LcyE and CrtRB1 
on provitamin A concentrations for 26 tropical maize populations.

Babu R(1), Rojas NP, Gao S, Yan J, Pixley K.

Author information:
(1)CIMMYT, Apdo Postal 6-641, 06600, Mexico, D. F., Mexico. r.babu@cgiar.org

Vitamin A deficiency (VAD) compromises immune function and is the leading cause 
of preventable blindness in children in many developing countries. 
Biofortification, or breeding staple food crops that are rich in micronutrients, 
provides a sustainable way to fight VAD and other micronutrient malnutrition 
problems. Polymorphisms, with associated molecular markers, have recently been 
identified for two loci, LcyE (lycopene epsilon cyclase) and CrtRB1 (β-carotene 
hydroxylase 1) that govern critical steps in the carotenoid biosynthetic pathway 
in maize endosperm, thereby enabling the opportunity to integrate 
marker-assisted selection (MAS) into carotenoid breeding programs. We validated 
the effects of 3 polymorphisms (LcyE5'TE, LcyE3'Indel and CrtRB1-3'TE) in 26 
diverse tropical genetic backgrounds. CrtRB1-3'TE had a two-ten fold effect on 
enhancing beta-carotene (BC) and total provitamin A (proA) content. 
Reduced-function, favorable polymorphisms within LcyE resulted in 0-30 % 
reduction in the ratio of alpha- to beta-branch carotenoids, and increase in 
proA content (sometimes statistically significant). CrtRB1-3'TE had large, 
significant effect on enhancing BC and total ProA content, irrespective of 
genetic constitution for LcyE5'TE. Genotypes with homozygous favorable 
CrtRB1-3'TE alleles had much less zeaxanthin and an average of 25 % less total 
carotenoid than other genotypes, suggesting that feedback inhibition may be 
reducing the total flux into the carotenoid pathway. Because this feedback 
inhibition was most pronounced in the homozygous favorable LcyE 
(reduced-function) genotypes, and because maximum total proA concentrations were 
achieved in genotypes with homozygous unfavorable or heterozygous LcyE, we 
recommend not selecting for both reduced-function genes in breeding programs. 
LcyE exhibited significant segregation distortion (SD) in all the eight, while 
CrtRB1 in five of eight digenic populations studied, with favorable alleles of 
both the genes frequently under-represented. MAS using markers reported herein 
can efficiently increase proA carotenoid concentration in maize.

DOI: 10.1007/s00122-012-1987-3
PMCID: PMC3555234
PMID: 23052023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Mar Drugs. 2012 Sep;10(9):2069-2088. doi: 10.3390/md10092069. Epub 2012 Sep
21.

Isolation and characterization of a lycopene ε-cyclase gene of Chlorella 
(Chromochloris) zofingiensis. Regulation of the carotenogenic pathway by 
nitrogen and light.

Cordero BF(1), Couso I(1), Leon R(2), Rodriguez H(1), Vargas MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Plant Biochemistry and Photosynthesis, CIC Cartuja, University 
of Seville and CSIC, Avda. Americo Vespucio, n° 49, Seville 41092, Spain.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Experimental Sciences Faculty, University of Huelva, 
Avda. Fuerzas Armadas s/n, Huelva 27071, Spain.

The isolation and characterization of the lycopene ε-cyclase gene from the green 
microalga Chlorella (Chromochloris) zofingiensis (Czlcy-e) was performed. This 
gene is involved in the formation of the carotenoids α-carotene and lutein. 
Czlcy-e gene encoded a polypeptide of 654 amino acids. A single copy of Czlcy-e 
was found in C. zofingiensis. Functional analysis by heterologous 
complementation in Escherichia coli showed the ability of this protein to 
convert lycopene to δ-carotene. In addition, the regulation of the carotenogenic 
pathway by light and nitrogen was also studied in C. zofingiensis. High 
irradiance stress did not increase mRNA levels of neither lycopene β-cyclase 
gene (lcy-b) nor lycopene ε-cyclase gene (lcy-e) as compared with low irradiance 
conditions, whereas the transcript levels of psy, pds, chyB and bkt genes were 
enhanced, nevertheless triggering the synthesis of the secondary carotenoids 
astaxanthin, canthaxanthin and zeaxanthin and decreasing the levels of the 
primary carotenoids α-carotene, lutein, violaxanthin and β-carotene. Nitrogen 
starvation per se enhanced mRNA levels of all genes considered, except lcy-e and 
pds, but did not trigger the synthesis of astaxanthin, canthaxanthin nor 
zeaxanthin. The combined effect of both high light and nitrogen starvation 
stresses enhanced significantly the accumulation of these carotenoids as well as 
the transcript levels of bkt gene, as compared with the effect of only high 
irradiance stress.

DOI: 10.3390/md10092069
PMCID: PMC3475274
PMID: 23118722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2013 Feb;23(2):144-8. doi: 10.4014/jmb.1208.08068.

Overexpression and characterization of lycopene cyclase (CrtY) from marine 
bacterium Paracoccus haeundaensis.

Jeong TH(1), Ji K, Kim YT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Pukyong National University, Busan, Korea.

Lycopene cyclase converts lycopene to beta-carotene by catalyzing the formation 
of two beta-rings at each end of the linear carotene structure. This reaction 
takes place as a two-step reaction in which both sides of of the lycopene 
molecule are cyclized into beta-carotene rings via the monocyclic gamma-carotene 
as an intermediate. The crtY gene coding for lycopene cyclase from Paracoccus 
haeundaensis consists of 1,158 base pairs encoding 386 amino acids residues. An 
expression plasmid containing the crtY gene (pET44a-CrtY) was constructed and 
expressed in Escherichia coli, and produced a recombinant protein of 
approximately 43 kDa, corresponding to the molecular mass of lycopene cyclase. 
The expressed protein was purified to homogeneity by His-tag affinity 
chromatography and showed enzymatic activity corresponding to lycopene cyclase. 
We also determined the lycopene substrate specificity and NADPH cofactor 
requirements of the purified protein. The Km values for lycopene and NADPH were 
3.5 microM and 2 mM, respectively. The results obtained from this study will 
provide a wider base of knowledge on the enzyme characterization of lycopene 
cyclase at the molecular level.

DOI: 10.4014/jmb.1208.08068
PMID: 23412054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Yi Chuan. 2013 Feb;35(2):233-40. doi: 10.3724/sp.j.1005.2013.00233.

[Effect of silencing lycB gene on the carotenoid synthesis in Haematococcus 
pluvialis].

[Article in Chinese]

Gong WF(1), Lu LJ, Liu X, Chen XW, Chen DF.

Author information:
(1)College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin, China. 
gwf018@yahoo.com.cn

Haematococcus pluvialis is a freshwater planktonic single-cell microalgae. It 
will accumulate high amount of carotenoids under unfavorable environmental 
conditions. As one of carotenoids, lycopene is an important intermediate in the 
carotenoid biosynthesis pathway. Lycopene β-cyclase (LycB) is the key enzyme 
that catalyzes the circularization of lycopene to form β-carotene. In this 
study, we constructed a p1301-BS-RNAi vector using lycB from Dunaliella salina 
as the interference sequence with kanamycin and atrazine resistance marker, and 
then transformed it into H. pluvialis by electroporation. Sixteen independent 
transgenic lines were obtained after resistance selection, genome PCR, and 
RT-PCR analyses. Seven well-grown lines were selected to determine the contents 
of carotenoids by HPLC analysis after inducing by high light. The lycopene 
content in these lines was increased by 99.4% while the β-carotene content was 
decreased by 48.4%, indicating that the interference by heterogenous lycB could 
inhibit the conversion of lycopene into β-carotene. The amount of increase in 
lycopene was only 5% of the amount of decrease in β-carotene, indicating that 
95% of the decreased β-carotene was converted into other metabolites. Therefore, 
in order to largely increase the lycopene content in H. pluvialis, it is 
necessary to coordinatively regulate other metabolic pathways.

DOI: 10.3724/sp.j.1005.2013.00233
PMID: 23448937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Agric Food Chem. 2013 Mar 27;61(12):3082-9. doi: 10.1021/jf305359x. Epub
2013  Mar 18.

Modification of carotenoid levels by abscission agents and expression of 
carotenoid biosynthetic genes in 'valencia' sweet orange.

Alferez F(1), Pozo LV, Rouseff RR, Burns JK.

Author information:
(1)Horticultural Sciences Department, University of Florida , IFAS, Citrus 
Research and Education Center, 700 Experiment Station Road, Lake Alfred, Florida 
33850-2299, USA. alferez@iata.csic.es

The effect of 5-chloro-3-methyl-4-nitro-1H-pyrazole (CMNP) and ethephon on peel 
color, flavedo carotenoid gene expression, and carotenoid accumulation was 
investigated in mature 'Valencia' orange ( Citrus sinensis L. Osbeck) fruit 
flavedo at three maturation stages. Abscission agent application altered peel 
color. CMNP was more effective than ethephon in promoting green-to-red (a) and 
blue-to-yellow (b) color at the middle and late maturation stages and total 
carotenoid changes at all maturation stages. Altered flow of carotenoid 
precursors during maturation due to abscission agents was suggested by changes 
in phytoene desaturase (Pds) and ζ-carotene desaturase (Zds) gene expression. 
However, each abscission agent affected downstream expression differentially. 
Ethephon application increased β-carotene hydroxilase (β-Chx) transcript 
accumulation 12-fold as maturation advanced from the early to middle and late 
stages. CMNP markedly increased β- and ε-lycopene cyclase (Lcy) transcript 
accumulation 45- and 15-fold, respectively, at midmaturation. Patterns of 
carotenoid accumulation in flavedo were supported in part by gene expression 
changes. CMNP caused greater accumulation of total flavedo carotenoids at all 
maturation stages when compared with ethephon or controls. In general, CMNP 
treatment increased total red carotenoids more than ethephon or the control but 
decreased total yellow carotenoids at each maturation stage. In control fruit 
flavedo, total red carotenoids increased and yellow carotenoids decreased as 
maturation progressed. Trends in total red carotenoids during maturation were 
consistent with measured a values. Changes in carotenoid accumulation and 
expression patterns in flavedo suggest that regulation of carotenoid 
accumulation is under transcriptional, translational, and post-translational 
control.

DOI: 10.1021/jf305359x
PMID: 23451824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Mol Phylogenet Evol. 2013 Aug;68(2):221-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ympev.2013.03.012.
 Epub 2013 Mar 27.

Carotenoids in unexpected places: gall midges, lateral gene transfer, and 
carotenoid biosynthesis in animals.

Cobbs C(1), Heath J, Stireman JO 3rd, Abbot P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 
37235, USA.

Carotenoids are conjugated isoprenoid molecules with many important 
physiological functions in organisms, including roles in photosynthesis, 
oxidative stress reduction, vision, diapause, photoperiodism, and immunity. 
Until recently, it was believed that only plants, microorganisms, and fungi were 
capable of synthesizing carotenoids and that animals acquired them from their 
diet, but recent studies have demonstrated that two arthropods (pea aphid and 
spider mite) possess a pair of genes homologous to those required for the first 
step of carotenoid biosynthesis. Absent in all other known animal genomes, these 
genes appear to have been acquired by aphids and spider mites in one or several 
lateral gene transfer events from a fungal donor. We report the third case of 
fungal carotenoid biosynthesis gene homologs in an arthropod: flies from the 
family Cecidomyiidae, commonly known as gall midges. Using phylogenetic analyses 
we show that it is unlikely that lycopene cyclase/phytoene synthase and phytoene 
desaturase homologs were transferred singly to an ancient arthropod ancestor; 
instead we propose that genes were transferred independently from related fungal 
donors after divergence of the major arthropod lineages. We also examine 
variation in intron placement and copy number of the carotenoid genes that may 
underlie function in the midges. This trans-kingdom transfer of carotenoid genes 
may represent a key innovation, underlying the evolution of phytophagy and 
plant-galling in gall midges and facilitating their extensive diversification 
across plant lineages.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ympev.2013.03.012
PMID: 23542649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


173. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58144. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058144. Epub 2013 Mar
29.

Levels of lycopene β-cyclase 1 modulate carotenoid gene expression and 
accumulation in Daucus carota.

Moreno JC(1), Pizarro L, Fuentes P, Handford M, Cifuentes V, Stange C.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biología, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Chile, 
Santiago, Chile.

Plant carotenoids are synthesized and accumulated in plastids through a highly 
regulated pathway. Lycopene β-cyclase (LCYB) is a key enzyme involved directly 
in the synthesis of α-carotene and β-carotene through the cyclization of 
lycopene. Carotenoids are produced in both carrot (Daucus carota) leaves and 
reserve roots, and high amounts of α-carotene and β-carotene accumulate in the 
latter. In some plant models, the presence of different isoforms of 
carotenogenic genes is associated with an organ-specific function. D. carota 
harbors two Lcyb genes, of which DcLcyb1 is expressed in leaves and storage 
roots during carrot development, correlating with an increase in carotenoid 
levels. In this work, we show that DcLCYB1 is localized in the plastid and that 
it is a functional enzyme, as demonstrated by heterologous complementation in 
Escherichia coli and over expression and post transcriptional gene silencing in 
carrot. Transgenic plants with higher or reduced levels of DcLcyb1 had 
incremented or reduced levels of chlorophyll, total carotenoids and β-carotene 
in leaves and in the storage roots, respectively. In addition, changes in the 
expression of DcLcyb1 are accompanied by a modulation in the expression of key 
endogenous carotenogenic genes. Our results indicate that DcLcyb1 does not 
possess an organ specific function and modulate carotenoid gene expression and 
accumulation in carrot leaves and storage roots.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058144
PMCID: PMC3612080
PMID: 23555569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


174. J Agric Food Chem. 2013 Jul 3;61(26):6393-403. doi: 10.1021/jf4004576. Epub
2013  Jun 21.

Carotenogenic gene expression and carotenoid accumulation in three varieties of 
Cucurbita pepo during fruit development.

Obrero Á(1), González-Verdejo CI, Die JV, Gómez P, Del Río-Celestino M, Román B.

Author information:
(1)IFAPA, Centro Alameda del Obispo, Área de Mejora y Biotecnología, Apdo. 14004 
Córdoba, Spain. angeles.obrero@juntadeandalucia.es

The control of gene expression is a crucial regulatory mechanism in carotenoid 
accumulation of fruits and flowers. We investigated the role of transcriptional 
regulation of nine genes involved in the carotenoid biosynthesis pathway in 
three varieties of Cucurbita pepo with evident differences in fruit color. The 
transcriptional levels of the key genes involved in the carotenoid biosynthesis 
were higher in flower-, leaf-, and fruit skin tissues than flesh tissues. This 
correlated with higher concentration of carotenoid content in these tissues. The 
differential expression among the colored and white cultivars detected for some 
genes, such as LCYe, in combination with other regulatory mechanisms, could 
explain the large differences found in terms of carotenoid content among the 
three varieties. These results are a first step to elucidate carotenogenesis in 
C. pepo and demonstrate that, in general, regulation of the pathway genes is a 
critical factor that determines the accumulation of these compounds.

DOI: 10.1021/jf4004576
PMID: 23773001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Mol Genet Genomics. 2013 Oct;288(10):483-93. doi: 10.1007/s00438-013-0767-3.
 Epub 2013 Jul 6.

Chromosomal location of wheat genes of the carotenoid biosynthetic pathway and 
evidence for a catalase gene on chromosome 7A functionally associated with flour 
b* colour variation.

Crawford AC(1), Francki MG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Agriculture and Food Western Australia, 3 Baron Hay Ct, South 
Perth, WA, 6151, Australia.

Knowledge of molecular and genetic mechanisms controlling wheat grain quality 
characteristics is significant for improving flour for end-product 
functionality. Flour b* colour is an important quality trait for breeding wheat 
varieties to produce grain for specific market requirements. The degree of flour 
yellowness is due to the accumulation of carotenoids in grain, particularly 
lutein. Flour b* is under polygenic control and quantitative trait loci (QTL) 
have frequently been reported on chromosome 7AL. Analysis of carotenoid genes 
showed that phytoene synthase (PSY) co-located to the QTL on 7AL but other genes 
at this locus are also thought to contribute flour b* colour variation. This 
study used the wheat genome survey sequence and identified the chromosomal 
location of all wheat carotenoid genes, but none other than PSY were located on 
7AL and, therefore, other genes may control flour b* colour variation including 
oxidative genes that degrade carotenoids. An investigation of EST bin mapped to 
7AL identified a gene encoding a catalase enzyme (Cat3-A1) that was 
phylogenetically related to other plant class III enzymes, co-located to the QTL 
for flour b* colour variation on 7AL in three mapping populations and expressed 
during seed development. Therefore, Cat3-A1 was functionally associated with 
flour b* colour variation. Catalase acts upon hydrogen peroxide as a substrate 
and it was postulated that Cat3-A1 alleles control varying degrees of bleaching 
action on lutein in developing wheat grain. Markers for Cat3-A1 developed in 
this study can be used in conjunction with other candidate gene markers 
including phytoene synthase and lycopene-ε-cylase to develop a molecular 
signature for selecting lines with specific flour b* colour values in wheat 
breeding.

DOI: 10.1007/s00438-013-0767-3
PMID: 23832668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Prog Lipid Res. 2013 Oct;52(4):539-61. doi: 10.1016/j.plipres.2013.07.001.
Epub  2013 Jul 26.

Carotenoids, versatile components of oxygenic photosynthesis.

Domonkos I(1), Kis M, Gombos Z, Ughy B.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Plant Biology, Biological Research Centre of Hungarian Academy 
of Sciences, P.O. Box 521, H-6701 Szeged, Hungary.

Carotenoids (CARs) are a group of pigments that perform several important 
physiological functions in all kingdoms of living organisms. CARs serve as 
protective agents, which are essential structural components of photosynthetic 
complexes and membranes, and they play an important role in the light harvesting 
mechanism of photosynthesizing plants and cyanobacteria. The protection against 
reactive oxygen species, realized by quenching of singlet oxygen and the excited 
states of photosensitizing molecules, as well as by the scavenging of free 
radicals, is one of the main biological functions of CARs. X-ray 
crystallographic localization of CARs revealed that they are present at 
functionally and structurally important sites of both the PSI and PSII reaction 
centers. Characterization of a CAR-less cyanobacterial mutant revealed that 
while the absence of CARs prevents the formation of PSII complexes, it does not 
abolish the assembly and function of PSI. CAR molecules assist in the formation 
of protein subunits of the photosynthetic complexes by gluing together their 
protein components. In addition to their aforementioned indispensable functions, 
CARs have a substantial role in the formation and maintenance of proper cellular 
architecture, and potentially also in the protection of the translational 
machinery under stress conditions.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plipres.2013.07.001
PMID: 23896007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Metab Eng. 2013 Nov;20:167-76. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2013.10.007. Epub 2013
Oct  17.

Elevation of lutein content in tomato: a biochemical tug-of-war between lycopene 
cyclases.

Giorio G(1), Yildirim A, Stigliani AL, D'Ambrosio C.

Author information:
(1)ALSIA-Centro Ricerche Metapontum Agrobios, Metaponto (MT) 75012, Italy. 
Electronic address: giovanni.giorio@alsia.it.

Lutein is becoming increasingly important in preventive medicine due to its 
possible role in maintaining good vision and in preventing age-related 
maculopathy. Average daily lutein intake in developed countries is often below 
suggested daily consumption levels, and lutein supplementation could be 
beneficial. Lutein is also valuable in the food and feed industries and is 
emerging in nutraceutical and pharmaceutical markets. Currently, lutein is 
obtained at high cost from marigold petals, and synthesis alternatives are thus 
desirable. Tomato constitutes a promising starting system for production as it 
naturally accumulates high levels of lycopene. To develop tomato for lutein 
synthesis, the tomato Red Setter cultivar was transformed with the tomato 
lycopene ε-cyclase-encoding gene under the control of a constitutive promoter, 
and the HighDelta (HD) line, characterised by elevated lutein and δ-carotene 
content in ripe fruits, was selected. HD was crossed to the transgenic HC line 
and to RS(B) with the aim of converting all residual fruit δ-carotene to lutein. 
Fruits of both crosses were enriched in lutein and presented unusual carotenoid 
profiles. The unique genetic background of the crosses used in this study 
permitted an unprecedented analysis of the role and regulation of the lycopene 
cyclase enzymes in tomato. A new defined biochemical index, the relative cyclase 
activity ratio, was used to discern post-transcriptional regulation of cyclases, 
and will help in the study of carotenoid biosynthesis in photosynthetic plant 
species and particularly in those, like tomato, that have been domesticated for 
the production of food, feed or useful by-products.

© 2013 Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymben.2013.10.007
PMID: 24141052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Curr Genet. 1982 May;5(1):5-8. doi: 10.1007/BF00445733.

Genetics of carotene biosynthesis in Phycomyces.

Roncero MI(1), Cerdá-Olmedo E.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Genética, Facultad de Biologia, Universidad de Sevilla, 
Sevilla, Spain.

Genetic analysis of carotenogenesis in Phycomyces is hampered by the inability 
of most mutants to complete the sexual cycle. Heterokaryons between 
complementing mutants or between a mutant and a helper strain are, however, 
fertile. Using this method crosses have been carried out between mutants 
representing the different known genes and phenotypes.The gene for phytoene 
dehydrogenase, carB, is closely linked to carRA, a bifunctional gene specifying 
both lycopene cyclase and a product involved in substrate transfer. The 
regulatory gene carS lies on the same chromosome, but not close to the 
structural genes. The situation is thus reminiscent of an operon.Two 
chemoinsensitive mutants, showing little or no response to the effects of 
retinol and 2-(4-chlorophenyl)thiotriethylamine HCl on carotenogenesis, carry 
mutations in separate genes. One of these is probably identical with carRA; the 
other is a new gene termed carl.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00445733
PMID: 24186080


179. BMC Genomics. 2013 Nov 12;14:781. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-781.

Comparative genomics reveals candidate carotenoid pathway regulators of ripening 
watermelon fruit.

Grassi S, Piro G, Lee JM, Zheng Y, Fei Z, Dalessandro G, Giovannoni JJ, Lenucci 
MS(1).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biologiche ed Ambientali (Di,S,Te,B,A,), 
Università del Salento, via Prov,le Lecce-Monteroni,73100 Lecce, Italy. 
marcello.lenucci@unisalento.it.

BACKGROUND: Many fruits, including watermelon, are proficient in carotenoid 
accumulation during ripening. While most genes encoding steps in the carotenoid 
biosynthetic pathway have been cloned, few transcriptional regulators of these 
genes have been defined to date. Here we describe the identification of a set of 
putative carotenoid-related transcription factors resulting from fresh 
watermelon carotenoid and transcriptome analysis during fruit development and 
ripening. Our goal is to both clarify the expression profiles of carotenoid 
pathway genes and to identify candidate regulators and molecular targets for 
crop improvement.
RESULTS: Total carotenoids progressively increased during fruit ripening up to 
~55 μg g(-1) fw in red-ripe fruits. Trans-lycopene was the carotenoid that 
contributed most to this increase. Many of the genes related to carotenoid 
metabolism displayed changing expression levels during fruit ripening generating 
a metabolic flux toward carotenoid synthesis. Constitutive low expression of 
lycopene cyclase genes resulted in lycopene accumulation. RNA-seq expression 
profiling of watermelon fruit development yielded a set of transcription factors 
whose expression was correlated with ripening and carotenoid accumulation. 
Nineteen putative transcription factor genes from watermelon and homologous to 
tomato carotenoid-associated genes were identified. Among these, six were 
differentially expressed in the flesh of both species during fruit development 
and ripening.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together the data suggest that, while the regulation of a 
common set of metabolic genes likely influences carotenoid synthesis and 
accumulation in watermelon and tomato fruits during development and ripening, 
specific and limiting regulators may differ between climacteric and 
non-climacteric fruits, possibly related to their differential susceptibility to 
and use of ethylene during ripening.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-781
PMCID: PMC3840736
PMID: 24219562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Planta. 1988 Apr;174(1):59-66. doi: 10.1007/BF00394874.

The photoregulation of carotenoid biosynthesis in Aspergillus giganteus mut. 
alba.

El-Jack M(1), Mackenzie A, Bramley PM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Royal Holloway and Bedford New College, TW20 OEX, 
Egham, Surrey, UK.

Aspergillus giganteus mut. alba grown in darkness produced no carotenoids, but 
illuminated shake cultures accumulated 170 μg·g(-1) dry weight of β-carotene. 
Maximum carotenoid production occurred in white light of energy fluence rate of 
50 W·m(-2). Blue light, but not red light, induced β-carotene formation. A light 
induction period of 10 h was required for maximum β-carotene synthesis, and this 
was attained 48 h after illumination. 5-Fluorouracil, actinomycin D and 
cycloheximide prevented photoinduction of carotenogenesis, indicating that 
photoregulation is at the transcriptional level. Comparisons of carotenogenic 
enzyme activities of light- and dark-grown cultures showed that phytoene 
synthetase, phytoene dehydrogenase and lycopene cyclase were totally 
photoinduced. Photoinduction of all three carotenogenic enzymes occurred after 
12 h illumination. Squalene formation increased some four-fold upon 
illumination.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00394874
PMID: 24221418181. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2014 Jan;98(1):345-50. doi: 
10.1007/s00253-013-5358-z. Epub 2013 Nov 17.

Genetic engineering of the complete carotenoid pathway towards enhanced 
astaxanthin formation in Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous starting from a 
high-yield mutant.

Gassel S(1), Breitenbach J, Sandmann G.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Bioscience, J.W. Goethe Universität, Max von Laue Str. 
9, 60438, Frankfurt, Germany.

The yeast Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous is one of the rare organisms which can 
synthesize the commercially interesting carotenoid astaxanthin. However, 
astaxanthin yield in wild-type and also in classical mutants is still too low 
for an attractive bioprocess. Therefore, we combined classical mutagenesis with 
genetic engineering of the complete pathway covering improved precursor supply 
for carotenogenesis, enhanced metabolite flow into the pathway, and efficient 
conversion of intermediates into the desired end product astaxanthin. We also 
constructed new transformation plasmids for the stepwise expression of the genes 
of 3-hydroxymethyl-3-glutaryl coenzyme A reductase, geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate 
synthase, phytoene synthase/lycopene cyclase, and astaxanthin synthase. Starting 
from two mutants with a 15-fold higher astaxanthin, we obtained transformants 
with an additional 6-fold increase in the final step of pathway engineering. 
Thus, a maximum astaxanthin content of almost 9 mg per g dry weight was reached 
in shaking cultures. Under optimized fermenter conditions, astaxanthin 
production with these engineered transformants should be comparable to 
Haematococcus pluvialis, the leading commercial producer of natural astaxanthin.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-013-5358-z
PMID: 24241897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Plant Cell Physiol. 2014 Jan;55(1):194-200. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pct170. Epub
2013  Nov 26.

Carotenoid analysis of a liverwort Marchantia polymorpha and functional 
identification of its lycopene β- and ε-cyclase genes.

Takemura M(1), Maoka T, Misawa N.

Author information:
(1)Research Institute for Bioresources and Biotechnology, Ishikawa Prefectural 
University, 1-308, Suematsu, Nonoichi, Ishikawa, 921-8836 Japan.

Carotenoid biosynthesis in bryophytes has yet to be clarified. The liverwort 
Marchantia polymorpha L. is known to be an early land plant and is an emerging 
bryophyte model. In order to gain insight into the evolution of carotenoid 
biosynthesis in plants, we studied carotenoid biosynthesis in this liverwort. As 
is the case in higher plants, liverwort thalli contain lutein and β-carotene, as 
major carotenoids, as well as zeaxanthin, antheraxanthin, violaxanthin and 
9'-cis-neoxanthin. Based on liverwort expressed sequence tag (EST)/cDNA and 
genome sequences, we isolated two cyclase genes encoding lycopene β-cyclase 
(LCYb) and lycopene ε-cyclase (LCYe), which were involved in the synthesis of 
β-carotene and α-carotene. These enzymes were phylogenetically positioned 
between corresponding proteins of a green alga (Chlorophyta) and higher plants. 
Functional analysis of the two genes was performed using a heterologous 
Escherichia coli expression system, in which the Pantoea ananatis lycopene 
biosynthesis genes were co-expressed. The results indicated liverwort LCYb 
activity for the synthesis of β-carotene from lycopene, which was the same as 
that of higher plants. On the other hand, liverwort LCYe was able to form two 
ε-rings from lycopene to ε-carotene via δ-carotene, which was different from the 
Arabidopsis LCYe enzyme which generates only one ε-ring from lycopene.

DOI: 10.1093/pcp/pct170
PMID: 24285752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Nutr. 2014 May;144(5):608-13. doi: 10.3945/jn.113.188391. Epub 2014 Mar 5.

β-carotene-producing bacteria residing in the intestine provide vitamin A to 
mouse tissues in vivo.

Wassef L(1), Wirawan R, Chikindas M, Breslin PA, Hoffman DJ, Quadro L.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Food Science and.

Vitamin A deficiency (VAD) is an overwhelming public health problem that affects 
hundreds of millions of people worldwide. A definitive solution to VAD has yet 
to be identified. Because it is an essential nutrient, vitamin A or its 
carotenoid precursor β-carotene can only be obtained from food or supplements. 
In this study, we wanted to establish whether β-carotene produced in the mouse 
intestine by bacteria synthesizing the provitamin A carotenoid could be 
delivered to various tissues within the body. To achieve this, we took advantage 
of the Escherichia coli MG1655*, an intestine-adapted spontaneous mutant of E. 
coli MG1655, and the plasmid pAC-BETA, containing the genes coding for the 4 key 
enzymes of the β-carotene biosynthetic pathway (geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate 
synthase, phytoene synthase, phytoene desaturase, and lycopene cyclase) from 
Erwinia herbicola. We engineered the E. coli MG1655* to produce β-carotene 
during transformation with pAC-BETA (MG1655*-βC) and gavaged wild-type and 
knockout mice for the enzyme β-carotene 15,15'-oxygenase with this recombinant 
strain. Various regimens of bacteria administration were tested (single vs. 
multiple and low vs. high doses). β-Carotene concentration was measured by HPLC 
in mouse serum, liver, intestine, and feces. Enumeration of MG1655*-βC cells in 
the feces was performed to assess efficiency of intestinal colonization. We 
demonstrated in vivo that probiotic bacteria could be used to deliver vitamin A 
to the tissues of a mammalian host. These results have the potential to pave the 
road for future investigations aimed at identifying alternative, novel 
approaches to treat VAD.

DOI: 10.3945/jn.113.188391
PMID: 24598882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Methods Mol Biol. 2014;1132:265-76. doi: 10.1007/978-1-62703-995-6_16.

Plastid transformation in tomato.

Ruf S(1), Bock R.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie, Potsdam-Golm, 
Germany.

Tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) is one of the most important vegetable crops and 
has long been an important model species in plant biology. Plastid biology in 
tomato is especially interesting due to the chloroplast-to-chromoplast 
conversion occurring during fruit ripening. Moreover, as tomato represents a 
major food crop with an edible fruit that can be eaten raw, the development of a 
plastid transformation protocol for tomato was of particular interest to plant 
biotechnology. Recent methodological improvements have made tomato plastid 
transformation more efficient and facilitated applications in metabolic 
engineering and molecular farming. This article describes the basic methods 
involved in the generation and analysis of tomato plants with transgenic 
chloroplast genomes and summarizes current applications of tomato plastid 
transformation.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-62703-995-6_16
PMID: 24599859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Basic Microbiol. 2014 Oct;54(10):1053-61. doi: 10.1002/jobm.201300920.
Epub  2014 Mar 27.

Lycopene cyclase and phytoene synthase activities in the marine yeast 
Rhodosporidium diobovatum are encoded by a single gene crtYB.

Guo W(1), Tang H, Zhang L.

Author information:
(1)Key Discipline of Biological Engineering of Hebei Province, College of Life 
Sciences, Hebei University, Baoding, China; Key Laboratory of Microbial 
Diversity Research and Application of Hebei Province, College of Life Sciences, 
Hebei University, Baoding, China.

crtYB, encoding lycopene cyclase and phytoene synthase was cloned from 
Rhodosporidium diobovatum ATCC 2527 by rapid amplification of cDNA ends method. 
The full-length cDNA of crtYB is 2, 330 bp and contains eight introns. The gene 
products is a 594 amino acids, with a predicted molecular mass of 65.63 kDa and 
a pI of 6.73. The N-terminus of the protein contains six transmembrane regions, 
which has been characterized as a lycopene beta-cyclase. The C-terminal half has 
squalene and phytoene synthase signatures that identified as phytoene 
synthetase. By heterologous complementary detection of this gene in E. coli and 
HPLC analysis, the regions responsible for phytoene synthesis and lycopene 
cyclization were localized within the protein.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/jobm.201300920
PMID: 24677129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Plant Biol (Stuttg). 2015 Jan;17(1):1-8. doi: 10.1111/plb.12186. Epub 2014
Apr  22.

Dissecting the mechanism of Solanum lycopersicum and Solanum chilense flower 
colour formation.

Gao M(1), Qu H, Gao L, Chen L, Sebastian RS, Zhao L.

Author information:
(1)Joint Tomato Research Institute, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China; Plant Biotechnology Research Center, 
School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 
China; Key Laboratory of Urban Agriculture (South) Ministry of Agriculture, 
School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 
China.

Flowers are the defining feature of angiosperms, and function as indispensable 
organs for sexual reproduction. Flower colour typically plays an important role 
in attracting pollinators, and can show considerable variation, even between 
closely related species. For example, domesticated tomato (S. lycopersicum) has 
orange/yellow flowers, while the wild relative S. chilense (accession LA2405) 
has bright yellow flowers. In this study, the mechanism of flower colour 
formation in these two species was compared by evaluating the accumulation of 
carotenoids, assessing the expression genes related to carotenoid biosynthetic 
pathways and observing chromoplast ultrastructure. In S. chilense petals, genes 
associated with the lutein branch of the carotenoid biosynthetic pathway, 
phytoene desaturase (PDS), ζ-carotene desaturase (ZDS), lycopene β-cyclase 
(LCY-B), β-ring hydroxylase (CRTR-B) and ε-ring hydroxylase (CRTR-E), were 
highly expressed, and this was correlated with high levels of lutein 
accumulation. In contrast, PDS, ZDS and CYC-B from the neoxanthin biosynthetic 
branch were highly expressed in S. lycopersicum anthers, leading to increased 
β-carotene accumulation and hence an orange/yellow colour. Changes in the size, 
amount and electron density of plastoglobules in chromoplasts provided further 
evidence of carotenoid accumulation and flower colour formation. Taken together, 
these results reveal the biochemical basis of differences in carotenoid pigment 
accumulation and colour between petals and anthers in tomato.

© 2014 German Botanical Society and The Royal Botanical Society of the 
Netherlands.

DOI: 10.1111/plb.12186
PMID: 24750468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 Aug 22;15(8):14766-85. doi: 10.3390/ijms150814766.

Molecular cloning and functional characterization of the lycopene ε-cyclase gene 
via virus-induced gene silencing and its expression pattern in Nicotiana 
tabacum.

Shi Y(1), Wang R(2), Luo Z(3), Jin L(4), Liu P(5), Chen Q(6), Li Z(7), Li F(8), 
Wei C(9), Wu M(10), Wei P(11), Xie H(12), Qu L(13), Lin F(14), Yang J(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, China. 
symzgh@163.com.
(2)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, China. wangranljj2010@163.com.
(3)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, China. zhiwubingdu@sohu.com.
(4)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, China. jin_lf@126.com.
(5)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, China. spesge@163.com.
(6)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, China. nanzhichan@gmail.com.
(7)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, China. ibi.zefeng@gmail.com.
(8)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, China. likite2002@163.com.
(9)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, China. ztrisam@126.com.
(10)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, China. mingzhuwus@126.com.
(11)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, China. weipan83@126.com.
(12)Molecular Breeding Group, Yunnan Academy of Tobacco Agricultural Sciences, 
Kunming 650031, China. xieh@tobacco.gov.cn.
(13)Department of Chemistry, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, China. 
qulingbo@zzu.edu.cn.
(14)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, China. fuchenglin@zju.edu.cn.
(15)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, China. yangjun@ztri.com.cn.

Lycopene ε-cyclase (ε-LCY) is a key enzyme that catalyzes the synthesis of 
α-branch carotenoids through the cyclization of lycopene. Two cDNA molecules 
encoding ε-LCY (designated Ntε-LCY1 and Ntε-LCY2) were cloned from Nicotiana 
tabacum. Ntε-LCY1 and Ntε-LCY2 are encoded by two distinct genes with different 
evolutionary origins, one originating from the tobacco progenitor, Nicotiana 
sylvestris, and the other originating from Nicotiana tomentosiformis. The two 
coding regions are 97% identical at the nucleotide level and 95% identical at 
the amino acid level. Transcripts of Ntε-LCY were detectable in both vegetative 
and reproductive organs, with a relatively higher level of expression in leaves 
than in other tissues. Subcellular localization experiments using an 
Ntε-LCY1-GFP fusion protein demonstrated that mature Ntε-LCY1 protein is 
localized within the chloroplast in Bright Yellow 2 suspension cells. Under 
low-temperature and low-irradiation stress, Ntε-LCY transcript levels 
substantially increased relative to control plants. Tobacco rattle virus 
(TRV)-mediated silencing of ε-LCY in Nicotiana benthamiana resulted in an 
increase of β-branch carotenoids and a reduction in the levels of α-branch 
carotenoids. Meanwhile, transcripts of related genes in the carotenoid 
biosynthetic pathway observably increased, with the exception of β-OHase in the 
TRV-ε-lcy line. Suppression of ε-LCY expression was also found to alleviate 
photoinhibition of Potosystem II in virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) plants 
under low-temperature and low-irradiation stress. Our results provide insight 
into the regulatory role of ε-LCY in plant carotenoid biosynthesis and suggest a 
role for ε-LCY in positively modulating low temperature stress responses.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms150814766
PMCID: PMC4159881
PMID: 25153631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2014 Aug 20;2:28. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2014.00028. 
eCollection 2014.

Optimization of the IPP Precursor Supply for the Production of Lycopene, 
Decaprenoxanthin and Astaxanthin by Corynebacterium glutamicum.

Heider SA(1), Wolf N(1), Hofemeier A(1), Peters-Wendisch P(1), Wendisch VF(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Biology and Center for Biotechnology (CeBiTec), Bielefeld 
University , Bielefeld , Germany.

The biotechnologically relevant bacterium Corynebacterium glutamicum, currently 
used for the million ton-scale production of amino acids for the food and feed 
industries, is pigmented due to synthesis of the rare cyclic C50 carotenoid 
decaprenoxanthin and its glucosides. The precursors of carotenoid biosynthesis, 
isopenthenyl pyrophosphate (IPP) and its isomer dimethylallyl pyrophosphate, are 
synthesized in this organism via the methylerythritol phosphate (MEP) or 
non-mevalonate pathway. Terminal pathway engineering in recombinant C. 
glutamicum permitted the production of various non-native C50 and C40 
carotenoids. Here, the role of engineering isoprenoid precursor supply for 
lycopene production by C. glutamicum was characterized. Overexpression of dxs 
encoding the enzyme that catalyzes the first committed step of the MEP-pathway 
by chromosomal promoter exchange in a prophage-cured, genome-reduced C. 
glutamicum strain improved lycopene formation. Similarly, an increased IPP 
supply was achieved by chromosomal integration of two artificial operons 
comprising MEP pathway genes under the control of a constitutive promoter. 
Combined overexpression of dxs and the other six MEP pathways genes in C. 
glutamicum strain LYC3-MEP was not synergistic with respect to improving 
lycopene accumulation. Based on C. glutamicum strain LYC3-MEP, astaxanthin could 
be produced in the milligrams per gram cell dry weight range when the endogenous 
genes crtE, crtB, and crtI for conversion of geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate to 
lycopene were coexpressed with the genes for lycopene cyclase and β-carotene 
hydroxylase from Pantoea ananatis and carotene C(4) oxygenase from Brevundimonas 
aurantiaca.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2014.00028
PMCID: PMC4138558
PMID: 25191655


189. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2014 Dec;98(24):9993-10003. doi: 
10.1007/s00253-014-6050-7. Epub 2014 Sep 6.

The astaxanthin dideoxyglycoside biosynthesis pathway in Sphingomonas sp. PB304.

Kim SH(1), Kim JH, Lee BY, Lee PC.

Author information:
(1)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical 
University of Denmark, Kogle Alle 6, 2970, Hørsholm, Denmark.

A major carotenoid in Sphingomonas sp. PB304, originally isolated from a river 
in Daejon City, South Korea, was identified as astaxanthin dideoxyglycoside. 
Gene clusters encoding the astaxanthin dideoxyglycoside biosynthetic enzymes 
were identified by screening Sphingomonas sp. PB304 fosmid libraries using 
degenerate probes that harbor highly conserved sequences from the Sphigomonas 
elodea-derived crtI and Nostoc sp. PCC 7120-dervied crtW genes. Selected 
positive gene clusters were fully sequenced and annotated, revealing genes 
encoding six putative carotenogenic enzymes: phytoene synthase (CrtB), phytoene 
desaturase (CrtI), lycopene cyclase (CrtY), carotene hydroxylase (CrtZ), 
carotene ketolase (CrtW), and glycosyltransferase (CrtX). All of the 
carotenogenic enzymes, except for CrtX, were functional in the recombinant host 
Escherichia coli expressing synthetic carotenogenic modules from Pantoea 
agglomerans. CrtX did not take up UDP-glucose or GDP-fucose as sugar substrates 
during the in vitro reaction. Although no direct experimental evidence was 
obtained for the function of Sphingomonas sp. PB304 CrtX, it can be categorized 
as a putative deoxyglycosyltransferase based on the presence of astaxanthin 
dideoxyglycoside in Sphingomonas sp. PB304, a putative corresponding gene in the 
carotenoid biosynthetic gene cluster, and high amino acid sequence homology to 
the existing glycosyltransferases. Therefore, we propose that astaxanthin 
dideoxyglycoside can be synthesized in Sphingomonas sp. PB304 via sequential 
reactions of six pathway enzymes, including CrtX on the phytoene intermediate.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-014-6050-7
PMID: 25193422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Dec;41(12):8137-48. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3714-4. Epub
2014  Sep 12.

Down-regulation of sweetpotato lycopene β-cyclase gene enhances tolerance to 
abiotic stress in transgenic calli.

Kim SH(1), Jeong JC, Park S, Bae JY, Ahn MJ, Lee HS, Kwak SS.

Author information:
(1)Plant Systems Engineering Research Center, Korea Research Institute of 
Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Gwahak-ro 125, Daejeon, 305-806, Korea.

Lycopene β-cyclase (LCY-β) is a key enzyme involved in the synthesis of α- and 
β-branch carotenoids such as α-carotene and β-carotene through the cyclization 
of lycopene. IbLCY-β had a length of 1,506 bp and approximately 80 % nucleotide 
sequence identity with that of tomato LCY-β. IbLCY-β was strongly expressed in 
leaves, and expression was enhanced by salt-stress and osmotic-stress 
conditions. To characterize the LCY-β gene (IbLCY-β) of sweetpotato (Ipomoea 
batatas), it was isolated and transformed into calli of white-fleshed 
sweetpotato using an IbLCY-β-RNAi vector. Transgenic IbLCY-β-RNAi calli had 
yellow to orange color and higher antioxidant activity compared to that of 
white, nontransgenic (NT) calli. Transgenic cells had significantly higher 
contents of total carotenoids, although lycopene was not detected in transgenic 
or NT cells. All transgenic calli had strongly activated expression of 
carotenoid biosynthetic genes such as β-carotene hydroxylases (CHY-β), 
cytochrome P450 monooxygenases (P450), and carotenoid cleavage dioxigenase 1 
(CCD1). Transgenic cells exhibited less salt-induced oxidative-stress damage 
compared to that of NT cells, and also had greater tolerance for polyethylene 
glycol (PEG)-mediated drought compared to that of NT cells, due to the higher 
water content and reduced malondialdehyde (MDA) content. The abscisic acid 
content was also higher in transgenic cells. These results show that a study of 
IbLCY-β can facilitate understanding of the carotenoid biosynthetic pathway in 
sweetpotato. IbLCY-β could be useful for developing transgenic sweetpotato 
enriched with nutritional carotenoids and with greater tolerance to abiotic 
stresses.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-014-3714-4
PMID: 25213547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


191. BMC Plant Biol. 2014 Dec 16;14:269. doi: 10.1186/s12870-014-0269-4.

Comparative analysis of carotenoid accumulation in two goji (Lycium barbarum L. 
and L. ruthenicum Murr.) fruits.

Liu Y, Zeng S, Sun W, Wu M, Hu W, Shen X, Wang Y.

BACKGROUND: The traditional Chinese medicinal plants Lycium barbarum L. and L. 
ruthenicum Murr. are valued for the abundance of bioactive carotenoids and 
anthocyanins in their fruits, respectively. However, the cellular and molecular 
mechanisms contributing to their species-specific bioactive profiles remain 
poorly understood.
RESULTS: In this study, the red fruit (RF) of L. barbarum was found to 
accumulate high levels of carotenoids (primarily zeaxanthin), while they were 
undetectable in the black fruit (BF) of L. ruthenicum. Cytological and gene 
transcriptional analyses revealed that the chromoplast differentiation that 
occurs in the chloroplast during fruit ripening only occurs in RF, indicating 
that the lack of chromoplast biogenesis in BF leads to no sink for carotenoid 
storage and the failure to synthesize carotenoids. Similar enzyme activities of 
phytoene synthase 1 (PSY1), chromoplast-specific lycopene β-cyclase (CYC-B) and 
β-carotene hydroxylase 2 (CRTR-B2) were observed in both L. ruthenicum and L. 
barbarum, suggesting that the undetectable carotenoid levels in BF were not due 
to the inactivation of carotenoid biosynthetic enzymes. The transcript levels of 
the carotenoid biosynthetic genes, particularly PSY1, phytoene desaturase (PDS), 
ζ-carotene desaturase (ZDS), CYC-B and CRTR-B2, were greatly increased during RF 
ripening, indicating increased zeaxanthin biosynthesis. Additionally, carotenoid 
cleavage dioxygenase 4 (CCD4) was expressed at much higher levels in BF than in 
RF, suggesting continuous carotenoid degradation in BF.
CONCLUSIONS: The failure of the chromoplast development in BF causes low 
carotenoid biosynthesis levels and continuous carotenoid degradation, which 
ultimately leads to undetectable carotenoid levels in ripe BF. In contrast, the 
successful chromoplast biogenesis in RF furnishes the sink necessary for 
carotenoid storage. Based on this observation, the abundant zeaxanthin 
accumulation in RF is primarily determined via both the large carotenoid 
biosynthesis levels and the lack of carotenoid degradation, which are regulated 
at the transcriptional level.

DOI: 10.1186/s12870-014-0269-4
PMCID: PMC4276078
PMID: 25511605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol. 2015 Apr;42(4):627-36. doi: 
10.1007/s10295-014-1565-6. Epub 2014 Dec 23.

Metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli to produce zeaxanthin.

Li XR(1), Tian GQ, Shen HJ, Liu JZ.

Author information:
(1)Biotechnology Research Center and Biomedical Center, School of Life Sciences, 
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510275, People's Republic of China.

Zeaxanthin is a high-value carotenoid that is used in nutraceuticals, cosmetics, 
food, and animal feed industries. Zeaxanthin is chemically synthesized or 
purified from microorganisms as a natural product; however, increasing demand 
requires development of alternative sources such as heterologous biosynthesis by 
recombinant bacteria. For this purpose, we molecularly engineered Escherichia 
coli to optimize the synthesis of zeaxanthin from lycopene using fusion 
protein-mediated substrate channeling as well as by the introduction of tunable 
intergenic regions. The tunable intergenic regions approach was more efficient 
compared with protein fusion for coordinating expression of lycopene β-cyclase 
gene crtY and β-carotene 3-hydroxylase gene crtZ. The influence of the substrate 
channeling effect suggests that the reaction catalyzed by CrtZ is the 
rate-limiting step in zeaxanthin biosynthesis. Then Pantoea ananatis, Pantoea 
agglomerans and Haematococcus pluvialis crtZ were compared. Because P. ananatis 
crtZ is superior to that of P. agglomerans or H. pluvialis for zeaxanthin 
production, we used it to generate a recombinant strain of E. coli BETA-1 
containing pZSPBA-2(P37-crtZPAN) that produced higher amounts of zeaxanthin 
(11.95 ± 0.21 mg/g dry cell weight) than other engineered E. coli strains 
described in the literature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10295-014-1565-6
PMID: 25533633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Biotechnol. 2015 Feb 20;196-197:33-41. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2015.01.006.
 Epub 2015 Jan 19.

Regulation of astaxanthin and its intermediates through cloning and genetic 
transformation of β-carotene ketolase in Haematococcus pluvialis.

Kathiresan S(1), Chandrashekar A(2), Ravishankar GA(3), Sarada R(4).

Author information:
(1)Plant Cell Biotechnology Department, CSIR-Central Food Technological Research 
Institute, Mysore 560020, India. Electronic address: kskathir@gmail.com.
(2)Plant Cell Biotechnology Department, CSIR-Central Food Technological Research 
Institute, Mysore 560020, India. Electronic address: achandrashekar55@gmail.com.
(3)Plant Cell Biotechnology Department, CSIR-Central Food Technological Research 
Institute, Mysore 560020, India. Electronic address: rgokare@yahoo.co.in.
(4)Plant Cell Biotechnology Department, CSIR-Central Food Technological Research 
Institute, Mysore 560020, India. Electronic address: sarada@cftri.res.in.

Astaxanthin, a high-value ketocarotenoid used in the pharmaceutical and 
nutraceutical industries is mainly produced from green alga, Haematococcus 
pluvialis. It is biosynthesized by the action of key enzyme, β-carotene ketolase 
(BKT) on β-carotene through intermediates echinenone and canthaxanthin. In this 
study, the β-carotene ketolase (bkt) gene was isolated from H. pluvialis and 
cloned in a vector pRT100 and further mobilized to a binary vector pCAMBIA 1304. 
The T-DNA of pCAMBIA 1304, which consists of cloned bkt, was successfully 
transformed to H. pluvialis through Agrobacterium mediation. The cloning and 
transformation of bkt in H. pluvialis was confirmed by Southern blotting and 
also by PCR analysis. Total carotenoids and astaxanthin content in the 
transformed cells were found to be 2-3-fold higher, while the intermediates like 
echinenone and canthaxanthin were found to be 8-10-fold higher than in the 
control cells. The expression level of carotenogenic genes like phytoene 
synthase (psy), phytoene desaturase (pds), lycopene cyclase (lcy), bkt, and 
β-carotene hydroxylase (bkh) were found to be higher in transformed cells 
compared to the non-transformed (NT) H. pluvialis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2015.01.006
PMID: 25612872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Theor Appl Genet. 2015 May;128(5):851-64. doi: 10.1007/s00122-015-2475-3.
Epub  2015 Feb 18.

Genome-wide association analysis reveals new targets for carotenoid 
biofortification in maize.

Suwarno WB(1), Pixley KV, Palacios-Rojas N, Kaeppler SM, Babu R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Agronomy and Horticulture, Faculty of Agriculture, Bogor 
Agricultural University, Jl. Meranti Kampus IPB Dramaga, Bogor, 16680, 
Indonesia.

Genome-wide association analysis in CIMMYT's association panel revealed new 
favorable native genomic variations in/nearby important genes such as 
hydroxylases and CCD1 that have potential for carotenoid biofortification in 
maize. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have been used extensively to 
identify allelic variation for genes controlling important agronomic and 
nutritional traits in plants. Provitamin A (proVA) enhancing alleles of lycopene 
epsilon cyclase (LCYE) and β-carotene hydroxylase 1 (CRTRB1), previously 
identified through candidate-gene based GWAS, are currently used in CIMMYT's 
maize breeding program. The objective of this study was to identify genes or 
genomic regions controlling variation for carotenoid concentrations in grain for 
CIMMYT's carotenoid association mapping panel of 380 inbred maize lines, using 
high-density genome-wide platforms with ~476,000 SNP markers. Population 
structure effects were minimized by adjustments using principal components and 
kinship matrix with mixed models. Genome-wide linkage disequilibrium (LD) 
analysis indicated faster LD decay (3.9 kb; r (2) = 0.1) than commonly reported 
for temperate germplasm, and therefore the possibility of achieving higher 
mapping resolution with our mostly tropical diversity panel. GWAS for various 
carotenoids identified CRTRB1, LCYE and other key genes or genomic regions that 
govern rate-critical steps in the upstream pathway, such as DXS1, GGPS1, and 
GGPS2 that are known to play important roles in the accumulation of precursor 
isoprenoids as well as downstream genes HYD5, CCD1, and ZEP1, which are involved 
in hydroxylation and carotenoid degradation. SNPs at or near all of these 
regions were identified and may be useful target regions for carotenoid 
biofortification breeding efforts in maize; for example a genomic region on 
chromosome 2 explained ~16% of the phenotypic variance for β-carotene 
independently of CRTRB1, and a variant of CCD1 that resulted in reduced 
β-cryptoxanthin degradation was found in lines that have previously been 
observed to have low proVA degradation rates.

DOI: 10.1007/s00122-015-2475-3
PMCID: PMC4544543
PMID: 25690716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Plant J. 2015 May;82(4):582-95. doi: 10.1111/tpj.12826. Epub 2015 Apr 13.

A lycopene β-cyclase/lycopene ε-cyclase/light-harvesting complex-fusion protein 
from the green alga Ostreococcus lucimarinus can be modified to produce 
α-carotene and β-carotene at different ratios.

Blatt A(1), Bauch ME(1), Pörschke Y(1), Lohr M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Allgemeine Botanik, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität, 55099, 
Mainz, Germany.

Biosynthesis of asymmetric carotenoids such as α-carotene and lutein in plants 
and green algae involves the two enzymes lycopene β-cyclase (LCYB) and lycopene 
ε-cyclase (LCYE). The two cyclases are closely related and probably resulted 
from an ancient gene duplication. While in most plants investigated so far the 
two cyclases are encoded by separate genes, prasinophyte algae of the order 
Mamiellales contain a single gene encoding a fusion protein comprised of LCYB, 
LCYE and a C-terminal light-harvesting complex (LHC) domain. Here we show that 
the lycopene cyclase fusion protein from Ostreococcus lucimarinus catalyzed the 
simultaneous formation of α-carotene and β-carotene when heterologously 
expressed in Escherichia coli. The stoichiometry of the two products in E. coli 
could be altered by gradual truncation of the C-terminus, suggesting that the 
LHC domain may be involved in modulating the relative activities of the two 
cyclase domains in the algae. Partial deletions of the linker region between the 
cyclase domains or replacement of one or both cyclase domains with the 
corresponding cyclases from the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii resulted in 
pronounced shifts of the α-carotene-to-β-carotene ratio, indicating that both 
the relative activities of the cyclase domains and the overall structure of the 
fusion protein have a strong impact on the product stoichiometry. The 
possibility to tune the product ratio of the lycopene cyclase fusion protein 
from Mamiellales renders it useful for the biotechnological production of the 
asymmetric carotenoids α-carotene or lutein in bacteria or fungi.

© 2015 The Authors The Plant Journal © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tpj.12826
PMID: 25759133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


196. BMC Plant Biol. 2015 May 7;15:112. doi: 10.1186/s12870-015-0514-5.

The lycopene β-cyclase plays a significant role in provitamin A biosynthesis in 
wheat endosperm.

Zeng J(1), Wang C(2), Chen X(3), Zang M(4), Yuan C(5), Wang X(6), Wang Q(7), Li 
M(8), Li X(9), Chen L(10), Li K(11), Chang J(12), Wang Y(13), Yang G(14), He 
G(15).

Author information:
(1)The Genetic Engineering International Cooperation Base of Chinese Ministry of 
Science and Technology, The Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of Chinese 
Ministry of Education, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. zengjian@hust.edu.cn.
(2)The Genetic Engineering International Cooperation Base of Chinese Ministry of 
Science and Technology, The Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of Chinese 
Ministry of Education, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. wcsuai@163.com.
(3)The Genetic Engineering International Cooperation Base of Chinese Ministry of 
Science and Technology, The Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of Chinese 
Ministry of Education, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. 529121755@qq.com.
(4)The Genetic Engineering International Cooperation Base of Chinese Ministry of 
Science and Technology, The Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of Chinese 
Ministry of Education, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. 931293801@qq.com.
(5)The Genetic Engineering International Cooperation Base of Chinese Ministry of 
Science and Technology, The Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of Chinese 
Ministry of Education, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. 524965239@qq.com.
(6)The Genetic Engineering International Cooperation Base of Chinese Ministry of 
Science and Technology, The Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of Chinese 
Ministry of Education, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. wangxiatiancwz@163.com.
(7)The Genetic Engineering International Cooperation Base of Chinese Ministry of 
Science and Technology, The Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of Chinese 
Ministry of Education, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. 754631109@qq.com.
(8)The Genetic Engineering International Cooperation Base of Chinese Ministry of 
Science and Technology, The Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of Chinese 
Ministry of Education, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. waterheart405@126.com.
(9)The Genetic Engineering International Cooperation Base of Chinese Ministry of 
Science and Technology, The Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of Chinese 
Ministry of Education, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. 417068352@qq.com.
(10)The Genetic Engineering International Cooperation Base of Chinese Ministry 
of Science and Technology, The Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of Chinese 
Ministry of Education, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. 15238065@qq.com.
(11)The Genetic Engineering International Cooperation Base of Chinese Ministry 
of Science and Technology, The Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of Chinese 
Ministry of Education, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. 651380086@qq.com.
(12)The Genetic Engineering International Cooperation Base of Chinese Ministry 
of Science and Technology, The Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of Chinese 
Ministry of Education, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. cjl@hust.edu.cn.
(13)The Genetic Engineering International Cooperation Base of Chinese Ministry 
of Science and Technology, The Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of Chinese 
Ministry of Education, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. wysh@hust.edu.cn.
(14)The Genetic Engineering International Cooperation Base of Chinese Ministry 
of Science and Technology, The Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of Chinese 
Ministry of Education, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. ygx@hust.edu.cn.
(15)The Genetic Engineering International Cooperation Base of Chinese Ministry 
of Science and Technology, The Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of Chinese 
Ministry of Education, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. hegy@hust.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Lycopene β-cyclase (LCYB) is a key enzyme catalyzing the 
biosynthesis of β-carotene, the main source of provitamin A. However, there is 
no documented research about this key cyclase gene's function and relationship 
with β-carotene content in wheat. Therefore, the objectives of this study were 
to clone TaLCYB and characterize its function and relationship with β-carotene 
biosynthesis in wheat grains. We also aimed to obtain more information about the 
endogenous carotenoid biosynthetic pathway and thus provide experimental support 
for carotenoid metabolic engineering in wheat.
RESULTS: In the present study, a lycopene β-cyclase gene, designated TaLCYB, was 
cloned from the hexaploid wheat cultivar Chinese Spring. The cyclization 
activity of the encoded protein was demonstrated by heterologous complementation 
analysis. The TaLCYB gene was expressed differentially in different tissues of 
wheat. Although TaLCYB had a higher expression level in the later stages of 
grain development, the β-carotene content still showed a decreasing tendency. 
The expression of TaLCYB in leaves was dramatically induced by strong light and 
the β-carotene content variation corresponded with changes of TaLCYB expression. 
A post-transcriptional gene silencing strategy was used to down-regulate the 
expression of TaLCYB in transgenic wheat, resulting in a decrease in the content 
of β-carotene and lutein, accompanied by the accumulation of lycopene to partly 
compensate for the total carotenoid content. In addition, changes in TaLCYB 
expression also affected the expression of several endogenous carotenogenic 
genes to varying degrees.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that TaLCYB is a genuine lycopene cyclase gene 
and plays a crucial role in β-carotene biosynthesis in wheat. Our attempt to 
silence it not only contributes to elucidating the mechanism of carotenoid 
accumulation in wheat but may also help in breeding wheat varieties with high 
provitamin A content through RNA interference (RNAi) to block specific 
carotenogenic genes in the wheat endosperm.

DOI: 10.1186/s12870-015-0514-5
PMCID: PMC4433027
PMID: 25943989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Metab Eng. 2015 Jul;30:69-78. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2015.04.009. Epub 2015
May 8.

Construction of lycopene-overproducing Saccharomyces cerevisiae by combining 
directed evolution and metabolic engineering.

Xie W(1), Lv X(1), Ye L(2), Zhou P(1), Yu H(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Bioengineering, College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, 
Zhejiang University, 310027 Hangzhou, PR China.
(2)Institute of Bioengineering, College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, 
Zhejiang University, 310027 Hangzhou, PR China; Key Laboratory of Biomass 
Chemical Engineering of Ministry of Education, Zhejiang University, 310027 
Hangzhou, PR China.
(3)Institute of Bioengineering, College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, 
Zhejiang University, 310027 Hangzhou, PR China. Electronic address: 
yuhongwei@zju.edu.cn.

Improved supply of farnesyl diphosphate (FPP) is often considered as a typical 
strategy for engineering Saccharomyces cerevisiae towards efficient terpenoid 
production. However, in the engineered strains with enhanced precursor supply, 
the production of the target metabolite is often impeded by insufficient 
capacity of the heterologous terpenoid pathways, which limits further conversion 
of FPP. Here, we tried to assemble an unimpeded biosynthesis pathway by 
combining directed evolution and metabolic engineering in S. cerevisiae for 
lycopene-overproduction. First, the catalytic ability of phytoene syntheses from 
different sources was investigated based on lycopene accumulation. Particularly, 
the lycopene cyclase function of the bifunctional enzyme CrtYB from 
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous was inactivated by deletion of functional domain 
and directed evolution to obtain mutants with solely phytoene synthase function. 
Coexpression of the resulting CrtYB11M mutant along with the CrtE and CrtI genes 
from X. dendrorhous, and the tHMG1 gene from S. cerevisiae led to production of 
4.47 mg/g DCW (Dry cell weight) of lycopene and 25.66 mg/g DCW of the by-product 
squalene. To further increase the FPP competitiveness of the lycopene synthesis 
pathway, we tried to enhance the catalytic performance of CrtE by directed 
evolution and created a series of pathway variants by varying the copy number of 
Crt genes. Finally, fed-batch fermentation was conducted for the diploid strain 
YXWPD-14 resulting in accumulation of 1.61 g/L (24.41 mg/g DCW) of lycopene, 
meanwhile, the by-production of squalene was reduced to below 1 mg/g DCW.

Copyright © 2015 International Metabolic Engineering Society. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymben.2015.04.009
PMID: 25959020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Comput Biol Chem. 2015 Oct;58:81-92. doi:
10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.06.001.  Epub 2015 Jun 6.

Comparative analysis of plant lycopene cyclases.

Koc I(1), Filiz E(2), Tombuloglu H(3).

Author information:
(1)Gebze Technical University, Faculty of Science, Department of Molecular 
Biology and Genetics, Gebze, Kocaeli, 41400, Turkey; Crop Science, University of 
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, United States. Electronic address: 
koc_ibrahim@yahoo.com.
(2)Duzce University, Department of Crop and Animal Production, Cilimli 
Vocational School, 81750, Cilimli, Duzce, Turkey.
(3)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science and Arts, Fatih University, 
Büyükçekmece, İstanbul, Turkey.

Carotenoids are essential isoprenoid pigments produced by plants, algae, fungi 
and bacteria. Lycopene cyclase (LYC) commonly cyclize carotenoids, which is an 
important branching step in the carotenogenesis, at one or both end of the 
backbone. Plants have two types of LYC (β-LCY and ϵ-LCY). In this study, plant 
LYCs were analyzed. Based on domain analysis, all LYCs accommodate lycopene 
cyclase domain (Pf05834). Furthermore, motif analysis indicated that motifs were 
conserved among the plants. On the basis of phylogenetic analysis, β-LCYs and 
ϵ-LCYs were classified in β and ϵ groups. Monocot and dicot plants separated 
from each other in the phylogenetic tree. Subsequently, Oryza sativa Japonica 
Group and Zea mays of LYCs as monocot plants and Vitis vinifera and Solanum 
lycopersicum of LYCs as dicot plants were analyzed. According to nucleotide 
diversity analysis of β-LCY and ϵ-LCY genes, nucleotide diversities were found 
to be π: 0.30 and π: 0.25, respectively. The result highlighted β-LCY genes 
showed higher nucleotide diversity than ϵ-LCY genes. LYCs interacting genes and 
their co-expression partners were also predicted using String server. The 
obtained data suggested the importance of LYCs in carotenoid metabolism. 3D 
modeling revealed that depicted structures were similar in O. sativa, Z mays, S. 
lycopersicum, and V. vinifera β-LCYs and ϵ-LCYs. Likewise, the predicted binding 
sites were highly similar between O. sativa, Z mays, S. lycopersicum, and V. 
vinifera LCYs. Most importantly, analysis elucidated the V/IXGXGXXGXXXA motif 
for both type of LYC (β-LCY and ϵ-LCY). This motif related to Rossmann fold 
domain and probably provides a flat platform for binding of FAD in O. sativa, Z 
mays, S. lycopersicum, and V. vinifera β-LCYs and ϵ-LCYs with conserved 
structure. In addition to lycopene cyclase domain, the V/IXGXGXXGXXXA motif can 
be used for exploring LYCs proteins and to annotate the function of unknown 
proteins containing lycopene cyclase domain. Overall results indicated that a 
high degree of conserved signature were observed in plant LYCs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.06.001
PMID: 26092704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Gene. 2016 Jan 15;576(1 Pt 3):395-403. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.10.051. Epub
 2015 Oct 23.

Overexpression of lycopene ε-cyclase gene from lycium chinense confers tolerance 
to chilling stress in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Song X(1), Diao J(2), Ji J(3), Wang G(4), Li Z(2), Wu J(5), Josine TL(4), Wang 
Y(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 
300072, PR China; School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Tianjin 
University, Tianjin 300072, PR China.
(2)School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 
300072, PR China.
(3)School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin 
300072, PR China. Electronic address: jijing@tju.edu.cn.
(4)School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin 
300072, PR China.
(5)School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 
300072, PR China; Department of Agronomy, Tianjin Agricultural University, 
300384, PR China.
(6)Yaohua High School, Tianjin, 300072, PR China.

Lutein plays an important role in protecting the photosynthetic apparatus from 
photodamage and eliminating ROS to render normal physiological function of 
cells. As a rate-limiting step for lutein synthesis in plants, lycopene 
ε-cyclase catalyzes lycopene to δ-carotene. We cloned a lycopene ε-cyclase gene 
(Lcε-LYC) from Lycium chinense (L. chinense), a deciduous woody perennial 
halophyte growing in various environmental conditions. The Lcε-LYC gene has an 
ORF of 1569bp encoding a protein of 522 aa. The deduced amino acid sequence of 
Lcε-LYC gene has higher homology with LycEs in other plants, such as Nicotiana 
tabacum and Solanum tuberosum. When L. chinense was exposed to chilling stress, 
relative expression of Lcε-LYC increased. To study the protective role of 
Lcε-LYC against chilling stress, we overexpressed the Lcε-LYC gene in 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Lcε-LYC overexpression led to an increase of lutein 
accumulation in transgenic A. thaliana, and the content of lutein decreased when 
transgenics were under cold conditions. In addition, the transgenic plants under 
chilling stress displayed higher activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD) and 
peroxidase (POD) and less H2O2 and malondialdehyde (MDA) than the control. 
Moreover, the photosynthesis rate, photosystem II activity (Fv/fm), and 
Non-photochemical quenching (NPQ) also increased in the transgenetic plants. On 
the whole, overexpression of Lcε-LYC ameliorates photoinhibition and 
photooxidation, and decreases the sensitivity of photosynthesis to chilling 
stress in transgenic plants.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.10.051
PMID: 26526130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Dec 21;16(12):30438-57. doi: 10.3390/ijms161226243.

Cloning of the Lycopene β-cyclase Gene in Nicotiana tabacum and Its 
Overexpression Confers Salt and Drought Tolerance.

Shi Y(1)(2), Guo J(3), Zhang W(4), Jin L(5), Liu P(6), Chen X(7), Li F(8), Wei 
P(9), Li Z(10), Li W(11), Wei C(12), Zheng Q(13), Chen Q(14), Zhang J(15), Lin 
F(16), Qu L(17), Snyder JH(18), Wang R(19).

Author information:
(1)College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou 450001, Henan, China. symzgh@163.com.
(2)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, Henan, China. symzgh@163.com.
(3)Institute of Plant Stress Biology, State Key Laboratory of Cotton Biology, 
School of Life Sciences, Henan University, Kaifeng 475004, Henan, China. 
jgguo@henu.edu.cn.
(4)China National Tobacco Quality Supervision &amp; Test Centre, Zhengzhou 
450001, Henan, China. zhangw_jh@163.com.
(5)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, Henan, China. jin_lf@126.com.
(6)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, Henan, China. Liu_pingping2012@163.com.
(7)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, Henan, China. chenxia0372@163.com.
(8)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, Henan, China. likite2002@163.com.
(9)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, Henan, China. weipan83@126.com.
(10)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, Henan, China. ibi.zefeng@gmail.com.
(11)Yunnan Academy of Tobacco Agricultural Sciences, Kunming 650031, Yunnan, 
China. lwz67@163.com.
(12)Staff Training Academy of CNTC, Zhengzhou 450008, Henan, China. 
ztrisam@126.com.
(13)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, Henan, China. zhengqingxia916@126.com.
(14)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, Henan, China. chen_qiansi@163.com.
(15)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, Henan, China. Jianfengzhang068@gmail.com.
(16)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, Henan, China. fuchenglin@zju.edu.cn.
(17)College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou 450001, Henan, China. qulingbo@zzu.edu.cn.
(18)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, Henan, China. johnhughsnyder@gmail.com.
(19)National Tobacco Gene Research Center, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, 
Zhengzhou 450001, Henan, China. wangranljj2010@163.com.

Carotenoids are important pigments in plants that play crucial roles in plant 
growth and in plant responses to environmental stress. Lycopene β cyclase 
(β-LCY) functions at the branch point of the carotenoid biosynthesis pathway, 
catalyzing the cyclization of lycopene. Here, a β-LCY gene from Nicotiana 
tabacum, designated as Ntβ-LCY1, was cloned and functionally characterized. 
Robust expression of Ntβ-LCY1 was found in leaves, and Ntβ-LCY1 expression was 
obviously induced by salt, drought, and exogenous abscisic acid treatments. 
Strong accumulation of carotenoids and expression of carotenoid biosynthesis 
genes resulted from Ntβ-LCY1 overexpression. Additionally, compared to wild-type 
plants, transgenic plants with overexpression showed enhanced tolerance to salt 
and drought stress with higher abscisic acid levels and lower levels of 
malondialdehyde and reactive oxygen species. Conversely, transgenic RNA 
interference plants had a clear albino phenotype in leaves, and some plants did 
not survive beyond the early developmental stages. The suppression of Ntβ-LCY1 
expression led to lower expression levels of genes in the carotenoid 
biosynthesis pathway and to reduced accumulation of carotenoids, chlorophyll, 
and abscisic acid. These results indicate that Ntβ-LCY1 is not only a likely 
cyclization enzyme involved in carotenoid accumulation but also confers salt and 
drought stress tolerance in Nicotiana tabacum.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms161226243
PMCID: PMC4691183
PMID: 26703579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


201. BMC Genet. 2016 Feb 17;17:43. doi: 10.1186/s12863-016-0350-0.

DHPLC technology for high-throughput detection of mutations in a durum wheat 
TILLING population.

Colasuonno P(1), Incerti O(2), Lozito ML(3), Simeone R(4), Gadaleta A(5), Blanco 
A(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Soil, Plant and Food Sciences, section of Genetic and Plant 
Breeding, University of Bari "Aldo Moro", Via G. Amendola 165/A, 70126, Bari, 
Italy. pattybiotec@yahoo.it.
(2)Department of Soil, Plant and Food Sciences, section of Genetic and Plant 
Breeding, University of Bari "Aldo Moro", Via G. Amendola 165/A, 70126, Bari, 
Italy. ornellaincerti87@libero.it.
(3)Department of Soil, Plant and Food Sciences, section of Genetic and Plant 
Breeding, University of Bari "Aldo Moro", Via G. Amendola 165/A, 70126, Bari, 
Italy. marialuisalozito@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Soil, Plant and Food Sciences, section of Genetic and Plant 
Breeding, University of Bari "Aldo Moro", Via G. Amendola 165/A, 70126, Bari, 
Italy. rosanna.simeone@uniba.it.
(5)Department of Soil, Plant and Food Sciences, section of Genetic and Plant 
Breeding, University of Bari "Aldo Moro", Via G. Amendola 165/A, 70126, Bari, 
Italy. agata.gadaleta@uniba.it.
(6)Department of Soil, Plant and Food Sciences, section of Genetic and Plant 
Breeding, University of Bari "Aldo Moro", Via G. Amendola 165/A, 70126, Bari, 
Italy. antonio.blanco@uniba.it.

BACKGROUND: Durum wheat (Triticum turgidum L.) is a cereal crop widely grown in 
the Mediterranean regions; the amber grain is mainly used for the production of 
pasta, couscous and typical breads. Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 
detection technologies and high-throughput mutation induction represent a new 
challenge in wheat breeding to identify allelic variation in large populations. 
The TILLING strategy makes use of traditional chemical mutagenesis followed by 
screening for single base mismatches to identify novel mutant loci. Although 
TILLING has been combined to several sensitive pre-screening methods for SNP 
analysis, most rely on expensive equipment. Recently, a new low cost and time 
saving DHPLC protocol has been used in molecular human diagnostic to detect 
unknown mutations.
RESULTS: In this work, we developed a new durum wheat TILLING population (cv. 
Marco Aurelio) using 0.70-0.85% ethyl methane sulfonate (EMS). To investigate 
the efficiency of the mutagenic treatments, a pilot screening was carried out on 
1,140 mutant lines focusing on two target genes (Lycopene epsilon-cyclase, 
ε-LCY, and Lycopene beta-cyclase, β-LCY) involved in carotenoid metabolism in 
wheat grains. We simplify the heteroduplex detection by two low cost methods: 
the enzymatic cleavage (CelI)/agarose gel technique and the denaturing 
high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC). The CelI/agarose gel approach 
allowed us to identify 31 mutations, whereas the DHPLC procedure detected a 
total of 46 mutations for both genes. All detected mutations were confirmed by 
direct sequencing. The estimated overall mutation frequency for the pilot assay 
by the DHPLC methodology resulted to be of 1/77 kb, representing a high 
probability to detect interesting mutations in the target genes.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrated the applicability and efficiency of a new strategy 
for the detection of induced variability. We produced and characterized a new 
durum wheat TILLING population useful for a better understanding of key gene 
functions. The availability of this tool together with TILLING technique will 
expand the polymorphisms in candidate genes of agronomically important traits in 
wheat.

DOI: 10.1186/s12863-016-0350-0
PMCID: PMC4756519
PMID: 26884094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Exp Bot. 2016 Apr;67(8):2325-38. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erw037. Epub 2016 Feb
18.

Increased Nicotiana tabacum fitness through positive regulation of carotenoid, 
gibberellin and chlorophyll pathways promoted by Daucus carota lycopene 
β-cyclase (Dclcyb1) expression.

Moreno JC(1), Cerda A(2), Simpson K(2), Lopez-Diaz I(3), Carrera E(3), Handford 
M(2), Stange C(4).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Vegetal, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de 
Chile, Las Palmeras 3425, Casilla 653 Ñuñoa, Santiago, Chile Current address: 
Max Planck Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie, Potsdam-Golm, Germany.
(2)Centro de Biología Molecular Vegetal, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de 
Chile, Las Palmeras 3425, Casilla 653 Ñuñoa, Santiago, Chile.
(3)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Plantas, C.S.I.C., Universidad 
Politécnica de Valencia, Ingeniero Fausto Elío s/n, 46022 Valencia, Spain.
(4)Centro de Biología Molecular Vegetal, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de 
Chile, Las Palmeras 3425, Casilla 653 Ñuñoa, Santiago, Chile cstange@uchile.cl.

Carotenoids, chlorophylls and gibberellins are derived from the common precursor 
geranylgeranyl diphosphate (GGPP). One of the enzymes in carotenoid biosynthesis 
is lycopene β-cyclase (LCYB) that catalyzes the conversion of lycopene into 
β-carotene. In carrot, Dclcyb1 is essential for carotenoid synthesis in the 
whole plant. Here we show that when expressed in tobacco, increments in total 
carotenoids, β-carotene and chlorophyll levels occur. Furthermore, 
photosynthetic efficiency is enhanced in transgenic lines. Interestingly, and 
contrary to previous observations where overexpression of a carotenogenic gene 
resulted in the inhibition of the synthesis of gibberellins, we found raised 
levels of active GA4 and the concommitant increases in plant height, leaf size 
and whole plant biomass, as well as an early flowering phenotype. Moreover, a 
significant increase in the expression of the key carotenogenic genes, Ntpsy1, 
Ntpsy2 and Ntlcyb, as well as those involved in the synthesis of chlorophyll 
(Ntchl), gibberellin (Ntga20ox, Ntcps and Ntks) and isoprenoid precursors 
(Ntdxs2 and Ntggpps) was observed. These results indicate that the expression of 
Dclcyb1 induces a positive feedback affecting the expression of isoprenoid gene 
precursors and genes involved in carotenoid, gibberellin and chlorophyll 
pathways leading to an enhancement in fitness measured as biomass, 
photosynthetic efficiency and carotenoid/chlorophyll composition.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erw037
PMCID: PMC4809289
PMID: 26893492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Pest Manag Sci. 2016 Dec;72(12):2254-2272. doi: 10.1002/ps.4264. Epub 2016
Apr  4.

Synthesis and evaluation of hydroxyazolopyrimidines as herbicides; 
the generation of amitrole in planta.

Clough JM(1), Dale RP(1), Elsdon B(1), Hawkes TR(1), Hogg BV(1), Howell A(1), 
Kloer DP(1), Lecoq K(1), McLachlan MM(1), Milnes PJ(1), O'Riordan TJ(2), 
Ranasinghe S(1), Shanahan SE(1), Sumner KD(1), Tayab S(1).

Author information:
(1)Syngenta, Jealott's Hill International Research Centre, Bracknell, Berks, UK.
(2)Syngenta, Jealott's Hill International Research Centre, Bracknell, Berks, UK. 
tim.o_riordan@syngenta.com.

BACKGROUND: Exploiting novel herbicidal modes of action is an important method 
to overcome the challenges faced by increasing resistance and regulatory 
pressure on existing commercial herbicides. Recent reports of inhibitors of 
enzymes in the non-mevalonate pathway of isoprenoid biosynthesis led to the 
design of a novel class of azolopyrimidines which were assessed for their 
herbicidal activity. Studies were also undertaken to determine the mode of 
action responsible for the observed herbicidal activity.
RESULTS: In total, 30 novel azolopyrimidines were synthesised and their 
structures were unambiguously determined by 1 H NMR, mass spectroscopy and X-ray 
crystallographic analysis. The herbicidal activity of this new chemical class 
was assessed against six common weed species, with compounds from this series 
displaying bleaching symptomology in post-emergence tests. A structure-activity 
relationship for the novel compounds was determined, which showed that only 
those belonging to the hydroxytriazolopyrimidine subclass displayed significant 
herbicidal activity. Observed similarities between the bleaching symptomology 
displayed by these herbicides and amitrole suggested that 
hydroxytriazolopyrimidines could be acting as elaborate propesticides of 
amitrole, and this was subsequently demonstrated in plant metabolism studies 
using Amaranthus retroflexus. It was shown that selected 
hydroxytriazolopyrimidines that displayed promising herbicidal activity 
generated amitrole, with peak concentrations of amitrole generally being 
observed 1 day after application. Additionally, the herbicidal activity of 
selected compounds was profiled against tobacco plants engineered to overexpress 
4-diphosphocytidyl-2C-methyl-d-erythritol synthase (IspD) or lycopene β-cyclase, 
and the results suggested that, where significant herbicidal activity was 
observed, inhibition of IspD was not responsible for the activity. Tobacco 
plants overexpressing lycopene β-cyclase showed tolerance to amitrole and the 
two most herbicidally active triazolopyrimidines.
CONCLUSIONS: Inhibition of IspD leading to herbicidal activity has been ruled 
out as the mode of action for the hydroxytriazolopyrimidine class of herbicides. 
Additionally, tobacco plants overexpressing lycopene β-cyclase showed tolerance 
to amitrole, which indicates that this is the main herbicidal mode of action for 
amitrole. Results from the metabolic fate study of selected 
hydroxytriazolopyrimidines suggested that the herbicidal activity displayed by 
these compounds is due to amitrole production, which was confirmed when tobacco 
plants overexpressing lycopene β-cyclase also showed tolerance towards two 
triazolopyrimidines from this study. © 2016 Society of Chemical Industry.

© 2016 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/ps.4264
PMID: 26918632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


204. PLoS One. 2016 Apr 12;11(4):e0153333. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0153333. 
eCollection 2016.

Neofunctionalization of Chromoplast Specific Lycopene Beta Cyclase Gene (CYC-B) 
in Tomato Clade.

Mohan V(1), Pandey A(1), Sreelakshmi Y(1), Sharma R(1).

Author information:
(1)Repository of Tomato Genomics Resources, Department of Plant Sciences, 
University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, India.

The ancestor of tomato underwent whole genome triplication ca. 71 Myr ago 
followed by widespread gene loss. However, few of the triplicated genes are 
retained in modern day tomato including lycopene beta cyclase that mediates 
conversion of lycopene to β-carotene. The fruit specific β-carotene formation is 
mediated by a chromoplast-specific paralog of lycopene beta cyclase (CYC-B) 
gene. Presently limited information is available about how the variations in 
CYC-B gene contributed to its neofunctionalization. CYC-B gene in tomato clade 
contained several SNPs and In-Dels in the coding sequence (33 haplotypes) and 
promoter region (44 haplotypes). The CYC-B gene coding sequence in tomato 
appeared to undergo purifying selection. The transit peptide sequence of CYC-B 
protein was predicted to have a stronger plastid targeting signal than its 
chloroplast specific paralog indicating a possible neofunctionalization. In 
promoter of two Bog (Beta old gold) mutants, a NUPT (nuclear plastid) DNA 
fragment of 256 bp, likely derived from a S. chilense accession, was present. In 
transient expression assay, this promoter was more efficient than the "Beta 
type" promoter. CARGATCONSENSUS box sequences are required for the binding of 
the MADS-box regulatory protein RIPENING INHIBITOR (RIN). The loss of 
CARGATCONSENSUS box sequence from CYC-B promoter in tomato may be related to 
attenuation of its efficiency to promote higher accumulation of β-carotene than 
lycopene during fruit ripening.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0153333
PMCID: PMC4829152
PMID: 27070417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


205. J Biosci. 2016 Jun;41(2):257-64. doi: 10.1007/s12038-016-9602-4.

Differential expression of carotenoid biosynthetic pathway genes in two 
contrasting tomato genotypes for lycopene content.

Pandurangaiah S(1), Ravishankar KV, Shivashankar KS, Sadashiva AT, 
Pillakenchappa K, Narayanan SK.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biotechnology, ICAR-Indian Institute of Horticultural Research, 
Bengaluru, India.

Tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) is one of the model plant to study carotenoid 
biosynthesis. In the present study, the fruit carotenoid content were quantified 
at different developmental stages for two contrasting genotypes, viz. IIHR-249-1 
and IIHR-2866 by UPLC. Lycopene content was high in IIHR-249-1 (19.45 mg/100 g 
fresh weight) compared to IIHR-2866 (1.88 mg/100 g fresh weight) at the ripe 
stage. qPCR was performed for genes that are involved in the carotenoid 
biosynthetic pathway to study the difference in lycopene content in fruits of 
both the genotypes. The expression of Phytoene synthase (PSY) increased by 
36-fold and Phytoene desaturase (PDS) increased by 14-fold from immature green 
stage to ripe stage in IIHR-249-1. The expression of Chloroplast lycopene 
beta-cyclase (LCY-B) and Chromoplast lycopene beta cyclase (CYC-B) decreased 
gradually from the initial stage to the ripe stage in IIHR-249-1. IIHR 249-1 
showed 3- and 1.8-fold decrease in gene expression for Chloroplast lycopene 
beta-cyclase (LCY-B) and Chromoplast lycopene beta-cyclase (CYC-B) .The F2 
hybrids derived from IIHR-249-1 and IIHR-2866 were analysed at the ripe stage 
for lycopene content. The gene expression of Chloroplast lycopene beta-cyclase 
(LCY-B) and Chromoplast lycopene beta-cyclase (CYC-B) in high and low lycopene 
lines from F2 progenies also showed the decrease in transcript levels of both 
the genes in high lycopene F2 lines. We wish to suggest that the differential 
expression of lycopene beta-cyclases can be used in marker-assisted breeding.

DOI: 10.1007/s12038-016-9602-4
PMID: 27240986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Mar Drugs. 2016 Jun 30;14(7):124. doi: 10.3390/md14070124.

Production of the Marine Carotenoid Astaxanthin by Metabolically Engineered 
Corynebacterium glutamicum.

Henke NA(1), Heider SA(2), Peters-Wendisch P(3), Wendisch VF(4).

Author information:
(1)Genetics of Prokaryotes, Faculty of Biology &amp; CeBiTec, Bielefeld 
University, Bielefeld D-33615, Germany. n.henke@uni-bielefeld.de.
(2)Genetics of Prokaryotes, Faculty of Biology &amp; CeBiTec, Bielefeld 
University, Bielefeld D-33615, Germany. saeheider@aol.com.
(3)Genetics of Prokaryotes, Faculty of Biology &amp; CeBiTec, Bielefeld 
University, Bielefeld D-33615, Germany. petra.peters-wendisch@uni-bielefeld.de.
(4)Genetics of Prokaryotes, Faculty of Biology &amp; CeBiTec, Bielefeld 
University, Bielefeld D-33615, Germany. volker.wendisch@uni-bielefeld.de.

Astaxanthin, a red C40 carotenoid, is one of the most abundant marine 
carotenoids. It is currently used as a food and feed additive in a hundred-ton 
scale and is furthermore an attractive component for pharmaceutical and cosmetic 
applications with antioxidant activities. Corynebacterium glutamicum, which 
naturally synthesizes the yellow C50 carotenoid decaprenoxanthin, is an 
industrially relevant microorganism used in the million-ton amino acid 
production. In this work, engineering of a genome-reduced C. glutamicum with 
optimized precursor supply for astaxanthin production is described. This 
involved expression of heterologous genes encoding for lycopene cyclase CrtY, 
β-carotene ketolase CrtW, and hydroxylase CrtZ. For balanced expression of crtW 
and crtZ their translation initiation rates were varied in a systematic approach 
using different ribosome binding sites, spacing, and translational start codons. 
Furthermore, β-carotene ketolases and hydroxylases from different marine 
bacteria were tested with regard to efficient astaxanthin production in C. 
glutamicum. In shaking flasks, the C. glutamicum strains developed here 
overproduced astaxanthin with volumetric productivities up to 0.4 mg·L(-1)·h(-1) 
which are competitive with current algae-based production. Since C. glutamicum 
can grow to high cell densities of up to 100 g cell dry weight (CDW)·L(-1), the 
recombinant strains developed here are a starting point for astaxanthin 
production by C. glutamicum.

DOI: 10.3390/md14070124
PMCID: PMC4962014
PMID: 27376307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


207. BMC Plant Biol. 2016 Jul 12;16(1):155. doi: 10.1186/s12870-016-0848-7.

Distinct expression and function of carotenoid metabolic genes and homoeologs in 
developing wheat grains.

Qin X(1), Fischer K(1)(2), Yu S(1), Dubcovsky J(1)(3), Tian L(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, Mail Stop 3, University of California, Davis, 
CA, 95616, USA.
(2)Quantitative and Systems Biology Program, University of California, Merced, 
CA, 95343, USA.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD, 20815, USA.
(4)Department of Plant Sciences, Mail Stop 3, University of California, Davis, 
CA, 95616, USA. ltian@ucdavis.edu.
(5)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Plant Functional Genomics and Resources, Shanghai 
Chenshan Botanical Garden, Shanghai, 201602, China. ltian@ucdavis.edu.
(6)Shanghai Chenshan Plant Science Research Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Shanghai, 201602, China. ltian@ucdavis.edu.

BACKGROUND: β-carotene, the most active provitamin A molecule produced by 
plants, plays important roles in human nutrition and health. β-carotene does not 
usually accumulate in the endosperm (i.e. flour) of mature wheat grains, which 
is a major food source of calories for humans. Therefore, enriching β-carotene 
accumulation in wheat grain endosperm will enable a sustainable dietary 
supplementation of provitamin A. Several metabolic genes affecting β-carotene 
accumulation have already been isolated from wheat, including phytoene synthase 
1 (PSY1), lycopene ε-cyclase (LCYe) and carotenoid β-ring hydroxylase1/2 
(HYD1/2).
RESULTS: In this work, we cloned and biochemically characterized two carotenoid 
cleavage dioxygenases (CCDs), CCD1 and CCD4, from wheat. While CCD1 homoeologs 
cleaved β-apo-8'-carotenal, β-carotene, lutein and zeaxanthin into apocarotenoid 
products, CCD4 homoeologs were inactive towards these substrates in in vitro 
assays. When analyzed by real-time qPCR, PSY1, LCYe, HYD1/2 and CCD1/4 
homoeologs showed distinct expression patterns in vegetative tissues and 
sections of developing tetraploid and hexaploid wheat grains, suggesting that 
carotenoid metabolic genes and homoeologs are differentially regulated at the 
transcriptional level in wheat.
CONCLUSIONS: The CCD1/4 enzyme activity and the spatial-temporal gene expression 
data provide critical insights into the specific carotenoid metabolic gene 
homoeologs that control β-carotene accumulation in wheat grain endosperm, thus 
establishing the knowledge base for generation of wheat varieties with enhanced 
β-carotene in the endosperm through breeding and genome editing approaches.

DOI: 10.1186/s12870-016-0848-7
PMCID: PMC4943016
PMID: 27405473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Subcell Biochem. 2016;79:161-98. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-39126-7_6.

Regulation of Carotenoid Biosynthesis During Fruit Development.

Lado J(1)(2), Zacarías L(3), Rodrigo MJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Agroquimica y Tecnologia de Alimentos (IATA), Consejo Superior 
de Investigaciones Cientificas (CSIC), Avenida Agustin Escardino 7, 46980, 
Paterna, Valencia, Spain. jlado@inia.org.uy.
(2)Instituto Nacional de Investigacion Agropecuaria (INIA), Camino a la Represa 
s/n, Salto, Uruguay. jlado@inia.org.uy.
(3)Instituto de Agroquimica y Tecnologia de Alimentos (IATA), Consejo Superior 
de Investigaciones Cientificas (CSIC), Avenida Agustin Escardino 7, 46980, 
Paterna, Valencia, Spain.

Carotenoids are recognized as the main pigments in most fruit crops, providing 
colours that range from yellow and pink to deep orange and red. Moreover, the 
edible portion of widely consumed fruits or their derived products represent a 
major dietary source of carotenoids for animals and humans. Therefore, these 
pigments are crucial compounds contributing to fruit aesthetic and nutritional 
quality but may also have protecting and ecophysiological functions in coloured 
fruits. Among plant organs, fruits display one of the most heterogeneous 
carotenoids patterns in terms of diversity and abundance. In this chapter a 
comprehensive list of the carotenoid content and profile in the most commonly 
cultivated fleshy fruits is reported. The proposed fruit classification systems 
attending to carotenoid composition are revised and discussed. The regulation of 
carotenoids in fruits can be rather complex due to the dramatic changes in 
content and composition during ripening, which are also dependent on the fruit 
tissue and the developmental stage. In addition, carotenoid accumulation is a 
dynamic process, associated with the development of chromoplasts during 
ripening. As a general rule, carotenoid accumulation is highly controlled at the 
transcriptional level of the structural and accessory proteins of the 
biosynthetic and degradation pathways, but other mechanisms such as 
post-transcriptional modifications or the development of sink structures have 
been recently revealed as crucial factors in determining the levels and 
stability of these pigments. In this chapter common key metabolic reactions 
regulating carotenoid composition in fruit tissues are described in addition to 
others that are restricted to certain species and generate unique carotenoids 
patterns. The existence of fruit-specific isoforms for key steps such as the 
phytoene synthase, lycopene β-cyclases or catabolic carotenoid cleavage 
dioxygenases has allowed an independent regulation of the pathway in fruit 
tissues and a source of variability to create novel activities or different 
catalytic properties. Besides key genes of the carotenoid pathway, changes in 
carotenoid accumulation could be also directly influenced by differences in gene 
expression or protein activity in the pathway of carotenoid precursors and some 
relevant examples are discussed. The objective of this chapter is to provide an 
updated review of the main carotenoid profiles in fleshy fruits, their pattern 
of changes during ripening and our current understanding of the different 
regulatory levels responsible for the diversity of carotenoid accumulation in 
fruit tissues.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-39126-7_6
PMID: 27485222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Z Naturforsch C J Biosci. 2016 Sep 1;71(9-10):295-301. doi: 
10.1515/znc-2016-0102.

Genetic modification of tomato with the tobacco lycopene β-cyclase gene produces 
high β-carotene and lycopene fruit.

Ralley L, Schuch W, Fraser PD, Bramley PM.

Transgenic Solanum lycopersicum plants expressing an additional copy of the 
lycopene β-cyclase gene (LCYB) from Nicotiana tabacum, under the control of the 
Arabidopsis polyubiquitin promoter (UBQ3), have been generated. Expression of 
LCYB was increased some 10-fold in ripening fruit compared to vegetative 
tissues. The ripe fruit showed an orange pigmentation, due to increased levels 
(up to 5-fold) of β-carotene, with negligible changes to other carotenoids, 
including lycopene. Phenotypic changes in carotenoids were found in vegetative 
tissues, but levels of biosynthetically related isoprenoids such as tocopherols, 
ubiquinone and plastoquinone were barely altered. Transformants showed tolerance 
to the bleaching herbicide β-cyclase inhibitor, 2-(4-chlorophenylthio) 
triethylamine. The phenotype was inherited for at least three generations.

DOI: 10.1515/znc-2016-0102
PMID: 27487494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Z Naturforsch C J Biosci. 2016 Sep 1;71(9-10):313-322. doi: 
10.1515/znc-2016-0150.

Carotenoid analysis of sweetpotato Ipomoea batatas and functional identification 
of its lycopene β- and ε-cyclase genes.

Khan MZ, Takemura M, Maoka T, Otani M, Misawa N.

Sweetpotato Ipomoea batatas is known as a hexaploid species. Here, we analyzed 
carotenoids contained in the leaves and tubers of sweetpotato cultivars 'White 
Star' (WS) and W71. These cultivars were found to contain several carotenoids 
unique to sweetpotato tubers such as β-carotene-5,6,5',8'-diepoxide and 
β-carotene-5,8-epoxide. Next, we isolated two kinds of carotene cyclase genes 
that encode lycopene β- and ε-cyclases from the WS and W71 leaves, by RT-PCR and 
subsequent RACE. Two and three lycopene β-cyclase gene sequences were, 
respectively, isolated from WS, named IbLCYb1, 2, and from W71, IbLCYb3, 4, 5. 
Meanwhile, only a single lycopene ε-cyclase gene sequence, designated IbLCYe, 
was isolated from both WS and W71. These genes were separately introduced into a 
lycopene-synthesizing Escherichia coli transformed with the Pantoea ananatis 
crtE, crtB and crtI genes, followed by HPLC analysis. β-Carotene was detected in 
E. coli cells that carried IbLCYb1-4, indicating that the IbLCYb1-4 genes encode 
lycopene β-cyclase. Meanwhile, the introduction of IbLCYe into the 
lycopene-synthesizing E. coli led to efficient production of δ-carotene with a 
monocyclic ε-ring, providing evidence that the IbLCYe gene codes for lycopene 
ε-(mono)cyclase. Expression of the β- and ε-cyclase genes was analyzed as well.

DOI: 10.1515/znc-2016-0150
PMID: 27564699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Nat Plants. 2016 Sep 12;2:16140. doi: 10.1038/nplants.2016.140.

Evolution of an atypical de-epoxidase for photoprotection in the green lineage.

Li Z(1)(2), Peers G(3), Dent RM(1), Bai Y(1), Yang SY(1), Apel W(1), Leonelli 
L(1), Niyogi KK(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
University of California, Berkeley, California 94720-3102, USA.
(2)Molecular Biophysics and Integrated Bioimaging Division, Lawrence Berkeley 
National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado 
80523-1878, USA.

Plants, algae and cyanobacteria need to regulate photosynthetic light harvesting 
in response to the constantly changing light environment. Rapid adjustments are 
required to maintain fitness because of a trade-off between efficient solar 
energy conversion and photoprotection. The xanthophyll cycle, in which the 
carotenoid pigment violaxanthin is reversibly converted into zeaxanthin, is 
ubiquitous among green algae and plants and is necessary for the regulation of 
light harvesting, protection from oxidative stress and adaptation to different 
light conditions(1,2). Violaxanthin de-epoxidase (VDE) is the key enzyme 
responsible for zeaxanthin synthesis from violaxanthin under excess light. Here 
we show that the Chlorophycean VDE (CVDE) gene from the model green alga 
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii encodes an atypical VDE. This protein is not 
homologous to the VDE found in plants and is instead related to a lycopene 
cyclase from photosynthetic bacteria(3). Unlike the plant-type VDE that is 
located in the thylakoid lumen, the Chlamydomonas CVDE protein is located on the 
stromal side of the thylakoid membrane. Phylogenetic analysis suggests that CVDE 
evolved from an ancient de-epoxidase that was present in the common ancestor of 
green algae and plants, providing evidence of unexpected diversity in 
photoprotection in the green lineage.

DOI: 10.1038/nplants.2016.140
PMCID: PMC5021192
PMID: 27618685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.


212. Environ Microbiol. 2017 Mar;19(3):982-989. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.13539.
Epub  2016 Oct 24.

The salt-regulated element in the promoter of lycopene β-cyclase gene confers a 
salt regulatory pattern in carotenogenesis of Dunaliella bardawil.

Liang MH(1), Lu Y(1), Chen HH(1), Jiang JG(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Food Science and Engineering, South China University of 
Technology, Guangzhou, 510640, China.

In the carotenoid biosynthesis, lycopene β-cyclase (LCYb) is a key regulatory 
enzyme involved in the conversion of lycopene into β-carotene. Under stress 
conditions, such as high salinity, high light and nutrient deprivation, large 
amounts of β-carotene can be accumulated in Dunaliella bardawil. To study on the 
molecular responses of salt stress in D. bardawil is of great significance to 
reveal the mechanisms of salt tolerance and engineer crop plants to be 
salt-tolerant. In this study, the full-length coding sequence of lcyb from D. 
bardawil (Dblcyb, GenBank: KX218392) was isolated by transcriptome sequencing. 
Then, the genomic sequence, promoter and terminator regions of Dblcyb were 
isolated by genome walking. The Dblcyb promoter (GenBank: KX218393) contained 
several typical transcription boxes, multiple light response elements and a 
salt-regulated element (SRE, GT1GMSCAM4). Dbpsy and Dblcyb responsible for 
β-carotene biosynthesis in D. bardawil was shown to be up-regulated under salt 
stress and their promoters contained the common SRE. By element deletion 
analysis and using Ble-EGFP as the reporter, the salt-inducible SRE was 
confirmed to confer salt-induced expression of Dblcyb promoter. It was indicated 
that the salt-regulated expression of Dblcyb may be attributed to the 
salt-responsive element (GT1GMSCAM4) and the GT-rich region in its genomic 
sequence.

© 2016 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.13539
PMID: 27657551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Microbiology (Reading). 2016 Nov;162(11):1963-1971. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.000376.  Epub 2016 Oct 4.

Metabolite profiling of Phycomyces blakesleeanus carotene mutants reveals global 
changes across intermediary metabolism.

Alcalde E(1), Fraser PD(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Royal Holloway, University of London, Egham 
Hill, Egham, Surrey TW20OEX, UK.

The filamentous fungus Phycomyces blakesleeanus provides a renewable biosource 
of industrial high-value compounds such as carotenes, other isoprenoids 
(ubiquinone and sterols), organic acids and fatty acids. Several Phycomyces 
mutants involved in the formation of β-carotene are available. For example, the 
carA mutants have a leaky mutation in the phytoene synthase and produce 
significantly lower amounts of carotenes, while the carB and carR mutants 
produce phytoene and lycopene, respectively, due to a null mutation in the genes 
encoding the phytoene dehydrogenase and lycopene cyclase, respectively. The carS 
mutants are mutated in the gene encoding the oxygenase responsible for the 
conversion of β-carotene into apocarotenoids and, as a result, β-carotene 
accumulates. In order to ascertain further the biochemical changes arising in 
these potential industrial strains, a metabolite profiling workflow was 
implemented for Phycomyces. GC-MS and ultra-performance liquid 
chromatography-photodiode array platforms enabled the identification of over 100 
metabolites in 11 carA, carB, carR and carS mutant strains and their wild-type 
comparator. All mutant strains possessed decreased TCA cycle intermediates, 
galactose, alanine and ribitol, while dodecanol and valine showed a general 
increase. As predicted, other terpenoid levels were affected in the carB, carR 
and carS mutants but not in the carA mutants. The global changes across 
intermediary metabolism of the mutants suggest that complex metabolic networks 
exist between intermediary and secondary metabolism or that other mutations 
beyond the carotene pathway may exist in these mutants. These data show the 
utility of the methodology in metabolically phenotyping Phycomyces strains with 
potential industrial exploitation.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.000376
PMID: 27707428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Photosynth Res. 2017 Mar;131(3):267-280. doi: 10.1007/s11120-016-0316-0.
Epub  2016 Oct 14.

Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 CruA (sll0147) encodes lycopene cyclase and requires 
bound chlorophyll a for activity.

Xiong W(1), Shen G(1), Bryant DA(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park, PA, 16802, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park, PA, 16802, USA. dab14@psu.edu.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Montana State University, Bozeman, 
MT, 59717, USA. dab14@psu.edu.

The genome of the model cyanobacterium, Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002, encodes two 
paralogs of CruA-type lycopene cyclases, SynPCC7002_A2153 and SynPCC7002_A0043, 
which are denoted cruA and cruP, respectively. Unlike the wild-type strain, a 
cruA deletion mutant is light-sensitive, grows slowly, and accumulates lycopene, 
γ-carotene, and 1-OH-lycopene; however, this strain still produces β-carotene 
and other carotenoids derived from it. Expression of cruA from Synechocystis sp. 
PCC 6803 (cruA 6803) in Escherichia coli strains that synthesize either lycopene 
or γ-carotene did not lead to the synthesis of either γ-carotene or β-carotene, 
respectively. However, expression of this orthologous cruA 6803 gene (sll0147) 
in the Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002 cruA deletion mutant produced strains with 
phenotypic properties identical to the wild type. CruA6803 was purified from 
Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002 by affinity chromatography, and the purified protein 
was pale yellow-green due to the presence of bound chlorophyll (Chl) a and 
β-carotene. Native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of the partly purified 
protein in the presence of lithium dodecylsulfate at 4 °C confirmed that the 
protein was yellow-green in color. When purified CruA6803 was assayed in vitro 
with either lycopene or γ-carotene as substrate, β-carotene was synthesized. 
These data establish that CruA6803 is a lycopene cyclase and that it requires a 
bound Chl a molecule for activity. Possible binding sites for Chl a and the 
potential regulatory role of the Chl a in coordination of Chl and carotenoid 
biosynthesis are discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s11120-016-0316-0
PMID: 27743323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2017 Mar;101(5):1845-1856. doi: 
10.1007/s00253-016-7943-4. Epub 2016 Nov 8.

Scale translation from shaken to diffused bubble aerated systems for lycopene 
production by Blakeslea trispora under stimulated conditions.

Mantzouridou FT(1), Naziri E(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Food Chemistry and Technology, School of Chemistry, Aristotle 
University of Thessaloniki, 54124, Thessaloniki, Greece. fmantz@chem.auth.gr.
(2)Laboratory of Food Chemistry and Technology, School of Chemistry, Aristotle 
University of Thessaloniki, 54124, Thessaloniki, Greece.

This study deals with the scale up of Blakeslea trispora culture from the 
successful surface-aerated shake flasks to dispersed-bubble aerated column 
reactor for lycopene production in the presence of lycopene cyclase inhibitor 
2-methyl imidazole. Controlling the initial volumetric oxygen mass transfer 
coefficient (kLa) via airflow rate contributes to increasing cell mass and 
lycopene accumulation. Inhibitor effectiveness seems to decrease in conditions 
of high cell mass. Optimization of crude soybean oil (CSO), airflow rate, and 
2-methyl imidazole was arranged according to central composite statistical 
design. The optimized levels of factors were 110.5 g/L, 2.3 vvm, and 29.5 mg/L, 
respectively. At this optimum setting, maximum lycopene yield (256 mg/L) was 
comparable or even higher to those reported in shake flasks and stirred tank 
reactor. 2-Methyl imidazole use at levels significantly lower than those 
reported for other inhibitors in the literature was successful in terms of 
process selectivity. CSO provides economic benefits to the process through its 
ability to stimulate lycopene synthesis, as an inexpensive carbon source and 
oxygen vector at the same time.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-016-7943-4
PMID: 27822738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Biotechnol Lett. 2017 Mar;39(3):439-446. doi: 10.1007/s10529-016-2265-2.
Epub  2016 Dec 1.

Generation of lycopene-overproducing strains of the fungus Mucor circinelloides 
reveals important aspects of lycopene formation and accumulation.

Zhang Y(1), Chen H(2), Navarro E(3), López-García S(3), Chen YQ(1), Zhang H(1), 
Chen W(1)(4), Garre V(5).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, School of Food Science 
and Technology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, 214122, People's Republic of China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, School of Food Science 
and Technology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, 214122, People's Republic of China. 
haiqinchen@jiangnan.edu.cn.
(3)Departamento de Genética y Microbiología (Unidad Asociada al IQFR-CSIC), 
Facultad de Biología, Universidad de Murcia, 30100, Murcia, Spain.
(4)Beijing Innovation Centre of Food Nutrition and Human Health, Beijing 
Technology and Business University (BTBU), Beijing, 100048, People's Republic of 
China.
(5)Departamento de Genética y Microbiología (Unidad Asociada al IQFR-CSIC), 
Facultad de Biología, Universidad de Murcia, 30100, Murcia, Spain. vgarre@um.es.

OBJECTIVES: To generate lycopene-overproducing strains of the fungus Mucor 
circinelloides with interest for industrial production and to gain insight into 
the catalytic mechanism of lycopene cyclase and regulatory process during 
lycopene overaccumulation.
RESULTS: Three lycopene-overproducing mutants were generated by classic 
mutagenesis techniques from a β-carotene-overproducing strain. They carried 
distinct mutations in the carRP gene encoding lycopene cyclase that produced 
loss of enzymatic activity to different extents. In one mutant (MU616), the 
lycopene cyclase was completely destroyed, and a 43.8% (1.1 mg/g dry mass) 
increase in lycopene production was observed in comparison to that by the 
previously existing lycopene overproducer. In addition, feedback regulation of 
the end product was suggested in lycopene-overproducing strains.
CONCLUSIONS: A lycopene-overaccumulating strain of the fungus M. circinelloides 
was generated that could be an alternative for the industrial production of 
lycopene. Vital catalytic residues for lycopene cyclase activity and the 
potential mechanism of lycopene formation and accumulation were identified.

DOI: 10.1007/s10529-016-2265-2
PMID: 27909822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Am J Bot. 2017 Jan;104(1):116-126. doi: 10.3732/ajb.1600301. Epub 2017 Jan
12.

A wild origin of the loss-of-function lycopene beta cyclase (CYC-b) allele in 
cultivated, red-fleshed papaya (Carica papaya).

Wu M(1), Lewis J(2), Moore RC(3).

Author information:
(1)Miami University, Department of Biology, 212 Pearson Hall, Oxford, Ohio 45056 
USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Alabama State University, Montgomery, 
Alabama 36104 USA.
(3)Miami University, Department of Biology, 212 Pearson Hall, Oxford, Ohio 45056 
USA moorerc@miamiOH.edu.

PREMISE OF THE STUDY: The red flesh of some papaya cultivars is caused by a 
recessive loss-of-function mutation in the coding region of the 
chromoplast-specific lycopene beta cyclase gene (CYC-b). We performed an 
evolutionary genetic analysis of the CYC-b locus in wild and cultivated papaya 
to uncover the origin of this loss-of-function allele in cultivated papaya.
METHODS: We analyzed the levels and patterns of genetic diversity at the CYC-b 
locus and six loci in a 100-kb region flanking CYC-b and compared these to 
genetic diversity levels at neutral autosomal loci. The evolutionary 
relationships of CYC-b haplotypes were assessed using haplotype network analysis 
of the CYC-b locus and the 100-kb CYC-b region.
KEY RESULTS: Genetic diversity at the recessive CYC-b allele (y) was much lower 
relative to the dominant Y allele found in yellow-fleshed wild and cultivated 
papaya due to a strong selective sweep. Haplotype network analyses suggest the y 
allele most likely arose in the wild and was introduced into domesticated 
varieties after the first papaya domestication event. The shared haplotype 
structure between some wild, feral, and cultivated haplotypes around the y 
allele supports subsequent escape of this allele from red cultivars back into 
wild populations through feral intermediates.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study supports a protracted domestication process of papaya 
through the introgression of wild-derived traits and gene flow from cultivars to 
wild populations. Evidence of gene flow from cultivars to wild populations 
through feral intermediates has implications for the introduction of transgenic 
papaya into Central American countries.

© 2017 Botanical Society of America.

DOI: 10.3732/ajb.1600301
PMID: 28082282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Plant Cell Physiol. 2017 Apr 1;58(4):831-838. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcx015.

Functional Lycopene Cyclase (CruA) in Cyanobacterium, Arthrospira platensis 
NIES-39, and its Role in Carotenoid Synthesis.

Sugiyama K(1), Ebisawa M(1), Yamada M(1), Nagashima Y(2), Suzuki H(2), Maoka 
T(3), Takaichi S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, Kogakuin University, Hachioji, Japan.
(2)Kazusa DNA Research Institute, Kisarazu, Chiba, Japan.
(3)Research Institute for Production Development, Sakyoku, Kyoto, Japan.
(4)Department of Biology, Nippon Medical School, Musashino, Tokyo, Japan.

The genus Arthrospira is filamentous, non-nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria that is 
commercially important. We identified the molecular structures of carotenoids in 
Arthrospira platensis NIES-39. The major carotenoid identified was β-carotene. 
In addition, the hydroxyl derivatives of β-cryptoxanthin and (3R,3'R)-zeaxanthin 
were also found to be present. The carotenoid glycosides were identified as 
(3R,2'S)-myxol 2'-methylpentoside and oscillol 2,2'-dimethylpentoside. The 
methylpentoside moiety was a mixture of fucoside and chinovoside in an 
approximate ratio of 1 : 4. Trace amounts of the ketocarotenoid 
3'-hydroxyechinenone were also found. Three types of lycopene cyclases have been 
functionally confirmed in carotenogenesis organisms. In cyanobacteria, the 
functional lycopene cyclases (CrtL, CruA and CruP) have only been found in four 
species. In this study, we found that CruA exhibited lycopene cyclase activity 
in transformed Escherichia coli, which contains lycopene, but CruP exhibited no 
lycopene cyclase activity and crtL was absent. This is the third cyanobacterial 
species in which CruA activity has been confirmed. Neurosporene was not a 
substrate of CruA in E. coli, whereas lycopene cyclases of CrtY (bacteria), CrtL 
(plants) and CrtYB (fungi) have been reported to convert neurosporene to 
7,8-dihydro-β-carotene. β-Carotene hydroxylase (CrtR) was found to convert 
β-carotene to zeaxanthin in transformed E. coli, which contains β-carotene. 
Among the β-carotene hydroxylases, bacterial CrtZ and eukaryotic CrtR and BCH 
have similarities, whereas cyanobacterial CrtR appears to belong to another 
clade. Based on the identification of the carotenoids and the completion of the 
entire nucleotide sequence of the A. platensis NIES-39 genome, we propose a 
biosynthetic pathway for the carotenoids as well as the corresponding genes and 
enzymes.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Japanese 
Society of Plant Physiologists. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/pcp/pcx015
PMID: 28371918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Mar Drugs. 2017 Apr 11;15(4):116. doi: 10.3390/md15040116.

Cloning and Functional Characterization of a Lycopene β-Cyclase from Macrophytic 
Red Alga Bangia fuscopurpurea.

Cao TJ(1), Huang XQ(2), Qu YY(3), Zhuang Z(4), Deng YY(5), Lu S(6).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life 
Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China. ctjsw@126.com.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life 
Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China. hl_david@msn.com.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life 
Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China. someoneqyy@hotmail.com.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life 
Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China. njcs2006@126.com.
(5)Jiangsu Institute of Oceanology and Marine Fisheries, Nantong 226007, China. 
dengyinyin@yeah.net.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life 
Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China. shanlu@nju.edu.cn.

Lycopene cyclases cyclize the open ends of acyclic lycopene (ψ,ψ-carotene) into 
β- or ε-ionone rings in the crucial bifurcation step of carotenoid biosynthesis. 
Among all carotenoid constituents, β-carotene (β,β-carotene) is found in all 
photosynthetic organisms, except for purple bacteria and heliobacteria, 
suggesting a ubiquitous distribution of lycopene β-cyclase activity in these 
organisms. In this work, we isolated a gene (BfLCYB) encoding a lycopene 
β-cyclase from Bangia fuscopurpurea, a red alga that is considered to be one of 
the primitive multicellular eukaryotic photosynthetic organisms and accumulates 
carotenoid constituents with both β- and ε-rings, including β-carotene, 
zeaxanthin, α-carotene (β,ε-carotene) and lutein. Functional complementation in 
Escherichia coli demonstrated that BfLCYB is able to catalyze cyclization of 
lycopene into monocyclic γ-carotene (β,ψ-carotene) and bicyclic β-carotene, and 
cyclization of the open end of monocyclic δ-carotene (ε,ψ-carotene) to produce 
α-carotene. No ε-cyclization activity was identified for BfLCYB. Sequence 
comparison showed that BfLCYB shares conserved domains with other functionally 
characterized lycopene cyclases from different organisms and belongs to a group 
of ancient lycopene cyclases. Although B. fuscopurpurea also synthesizes 
α-carotene and lutein, its enzyme-catalyzing ε-cyclization is still unknown.

DOI: 10.3390/md15040116
PMCID: PMC5408262
PMID: 28398223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


220. Front Plant Sci. 2017 Aug 2;8:1341. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2017.01341.
eCollection  2017.

Functional Characterization of a Missing Branch Component in Haematococcus 
pluvialis for Control of Algal Carotenoid Biosynthesis.

Lao YM(1)(2), Jin H(1)(2)(3), Zhou J(1)(2), Zhang HJ(3), Cai ZH(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Shenzhen Public Platform of Screening and Application of Marine Microbial 
ResourcesGuangdong, China.
(2)The Division of Ocean Science and Technology, Graduate School at Shenzhen, 
Tsinghua UniversityShenzhen, China.
(3)School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua UniversityBeijing, China.

Cyclization of acyclic lycopene by cyclases marks an important regulatory point 
in carotenoid biosynthesis. Though some algal lycopene epsilon cyclases (LCYEs) 
have been predicted computationally, very few have been functionally identified. 
Little is known about the regulation mechanisms of algal LCYEs. Recent 
comparative genomic analysis suggested that Haematococcus pluvialis contained 
only the β type cyclase (HpLCYB). However, in this study, carotenoid profiling 
found trace α-carotene in the salt-treated cells, indicating the in vivo 
activity of HpLCYE, a missing component for α-branch carotenoids. Thus, genes 
coding for HpLCYB and HpLCYE were isolated and functionally complemented in 
Escherichia coli. Substrate specificity assays revealed an exclusive cyclization 
order of HpLCYE to HpLCYB for the biosynthesis of heterocyclic carotenoids. 
Expression pattern studies and bioinformatic analysis of promoter regions showed 
that both cyclases were differentially regulated by the regulatory cis-acting 
elements in promoters to correlate with primary and secondary carotenoid 
biosynthesis under environmental stresses. Characterization of the branch 
components in algal carotenoid biosynthesis revealed a mechanism for control of 
metabolic flux into α- and β-branch by the competition and cooperation between 
HpLCYE and HpLCYB; and supplied a promising route for molecular breeding of 
cyclic carotenoid biosynthesis.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2017.01341
PMCID: PMC5539077
PMID: 28824677


221. Plant Cell Physiol. 2017 Dec 1;58(12):2155-2165. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcx149.

Papaya CpEIN3a and CpNAC2 Co-operatively Regulate Carotenoid 
Biosynthesis-Related Genes CpPDS2/4, CpLCY-e and CpCHY-b During Fruit Ripening.

Fu CC(1), Han YC(2), Kuang JF(1), Chen JY(1), Lu WJ(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical 
Agro-bioresources/Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Postharvest Science of 
Fruits and Vegetables, College of Horticulture, South China Agricultural 
University, Guangzhou 510642, PR China.
(2)Institute of Food Science, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Science/Key 
Laboratory of Post-Harvest Handing of Fruits, Ministry of Agriculture, Key 
Laboratory of Fruits and Vegetables Postharvest and Processing Technology 
Research of Zhejiang Province, Key Laboratory of China Light Industry, Hangzhou 
310021, PR China.

Papaya is an important tropical fruit with a rich source of carotenoids. The 
ripening of papaya is a physiological and metabolic process with remarkable 
changes including accumulation of carotenoids, which depends primarily on the 
action of ethylene. Ethylene response is mediated by a transcriptional cascade 
involving the transcription factor families of EIN3/EILs and ERFs. Although ERF 
members have been reported to control carotenoid production in Arabidopsis and 
tomato, whether EIN3/EILs are also involved in carotenoid biosynthesis during 
fruit ripening remains unclear. In this work, two EIN3 genes from papaya fruit, 
namely CpEIN3a and CpEIN3b, were studied, of which CpEIN3a was increased during 
fruit ripening, concomitant with the increase of transcripts of carotenoid 
biosynthesis-related genes including CpPDS2/4, CpZDS, CpLCY-e and CpCHY-b, and 
carotenoid content. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) and transient 
expression analyses revealed that CpEIN3a was able to bind to the promoters of 
CpPDS4 and CpCHY-b, and promoted their transcription. Protein-protein 
interaction assays indicated that CpEIN3a physically interacted with another 
transcription factor CpNAC2, which acted as a transcriptional activator of 
CpPDS2/4, CpZDS, CpLCY-e and CpCHY-b by directly binding to their promoters. 
More importantly, the transcriptional activation abilities of CpPDS2/4, CpLCY-e 
and CpCHY-b were more pronounced following their interaction. Collectively, our 
findings suggest that CpEIN3a interacts with CpNAC2 and, individually or 
co-operatively, activates the transcription of a subset of carotenoid 
biosynthesis-related genes, providing new insights into the regulatory networks 
of carotenoid biosynthesis during papaya fruit ripening.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Japanese 
Society of Plant Physiologists. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/pcp/pcx149
PMID: 29040739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2017 Nov 25;33(11):1814-1826. doi: 
10.13345/j.cjb.170041.

[Construction of high-yield strain by optimizing lycopene cyclase for β-carotene 
production].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Jin Y(1)(2), Han L(1), Zhang S(1)(2), Li S(1), Liu W(1), Tao Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, 
China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.

To optimize key enzymes, such as to explore the gene resources and to modify the 
expression level, can maximize metabolic pathways of target products. β-carotene 
is a terpenoid compound with important application value. Lycopene cyclase 
(CrtY) is the key enzyme in β-carotene biosynthesis pathway, catalyzing flavin 
adenine dinucleotide (FAD)-dependent cyclization reaction and β-carotene 
synthesis from lycopene precursor. We optimized lycopene cyclase (CrtY) to 
improve the synthesis of β-carotene and determined the effect of CrtY expression 
on metabolic pathways. Frist, we developed a β-carotene synthesis module by 
coexpressing the lycopene β-cyclase gene crtY with crtEBI module in Escherichia 
coli. Then we simultaneously optimized the ribosome-binding site (RBS) intensity 
and the species of crtY using oligo-linker mediated DNA assembly method (OLMA). 
Five strains with high β-carotene production capacity were screened out from the 
OLMA library. The β-carotene yields of these strains were up to 15.79-18.90 mg/g 
DCW (Dry cell weight), 65% higher than that of the original strain at shake 
flask level. The optimal strain CP12 was further identified and evaluated for 
β-carotene production at 5 L fermentation level. After process optimization, the 
final β-carotene yield could reach to 1.9 g/L. The results of RBS strength and 
metabolic intermediate analysis indicated that an appropriate expression level 
of CrtY could be beneficial for the function of the β-carotene synthesis module. 
The results of this study provide important insight into the optimization of 
β-carotene synthesis pathway in metabolic engineering.

Publisher: 
目标产物的合成途径往往需要对关键酶的来源、表达水平等因素进行系统性优化才能实现代谢通量的最大化。β-胡萝卜素是一类具有重要应用价值的萜类化合物，其中番茄红素环化酶 
(Lycopene cyclase，CrtY)是β-胡萝卜素合成途径中的关键酶，能够催化FAD 
依赖的环化反应将番茄红素转化合成β-胡萝卜素。本研究通过对CrtY 的系统优化提高β-胡萝卜素的合成水平，并确定CrtY 
的表达对代谢通路的影响。在大肠杆菌中以番茄红素合成模块为基础，通过引入番茄红素环化酶基因crtY 构建了β-胡萝卜素合成模块。并进一步利用寡聚接头介导的DNA 
组装方法 (Oligo-linker mediated assembly method，OLMA) 引入一系列不同强度的人工设计的核糖体结合位点 
(Ribosome-binding site，RBS)，对CrtY 的表达强度、基因来源等因素进行高通量的优化。通过OLMA 文库构建和平板筛选，获得了5 
株高产β-胡萝卜素的工程菌株。在摇瓶中，5 株工程菌株的β-胡萝卜素产量可达15.79−18.90 mg/g DCW (Dry cell 
weight)，比优化前提高了65%。进一步选取了其中的CP12菌株，在5 L 
发酵罐上，利用高密度培养技术验证工程菌株合成β-胡萝卜素的能力。最终β-胡萝卜素产量可达1.9 g/L。RBS 强度分析及代谢中间体分析表明，适当地降低CrtY 
表达强度能够有利于β-胡萝卜素模块相关基因之间协同发挥作用。以上结果为β-胡萝卜素合成途径的优化规律提供了理论指导。.

DOI: 10.13345/j.cjb.170041
PMID: 29202518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Microbiology (Reading). 2018 Jan;164(1):78-87. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.000588.
Epub  2017 Dec 8.

CAR gene cluster and transcript levels of carotenogenic genes in Rhodotorula 
mucilaginosa.

Landolfo S(1), Ianiri G(2)(3), Camiolo S(1), Porceddu A(1), Mulas G(1), Chessa 
R(1), Zara G(1), Mannazzu I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Agricultural Sciences, Università degli Studi di Sassari, Viale 
Italia 39, 07100 Sassari, Italy.
(2)Department of Agricultural, Environmental and Food Sciences, Università degli 
Studi del Molise, Via Francesco de Sanctis, 86100 Campobasso, Italy.
(3)Present address: Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke 
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

A molecular approach was applied to the study of the carotenoid biosynthetic 
pathway of Rhodotorula mucilaginosa. At first, functional annotation of the 
genome of R. mucilaginosa C2.5t1 was carried out and gene ontology categories 
were assigned to 4033 predicted proteins. Then, a set of genes involved in 
different steps of carotenogenesis was identified and those coding for phytoene 
desaturase, phytoene synthase/lycopene cyclase and carotenoid dioxygenase (CAR 
genes) proved to be clustered within a region of ~10 kb. Quantitative PCR of the 
genes involved in carotenoid biosynthesis showed that genes coding for 
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutharyl-CoA reductase and mevalonate kinase are induced 
during exponential phase while no clear trend of induction was observed for 
phytoene synthase/lycopene cyclase and phytoene dehydrogenase encoding genes. 
Thus, in R. mucilaginosa the induction of genes involved in the early steps of 
carotenoid biosynthesis is transient and accompanies the onset of carotenoid 
production, while that of CAR genes does not correlate with the amount of 
carotenoids produced. The transcript levels of genes coding for carotenoid 
dioxygenase, superoxide dismutase and catalase A increased during the 
accumulation of carotenoids, thus suggesting the activation of a mechanism aimed 
at the protection of cell structures from oxidative stress during carotenoid 
biosynthesis. The data presented herein, besides being suitable for the 
elucidation of the mechanisms that underlie carotenoid biosynthesis, will 
contribute to boosting the biotechnological potential of this yeast by improving 
the outcome of further research efforts aimed at also exploring other features 
of interest.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.000588
PMID: 29219805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Plant Physiol. 2018 Apr;176(4):2657-2676. doi: 10.1104/pp.17.01830. Epub
2018  Feb 20.

The Citrus Transcription Factor CsMADS6 Modulates Carotenoid Metabolism by 
Directly Regulating Carotenogenic Genes.

Lu S(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhu K(1), Yang W(1), Ye J(1), Chai L(1), Xu Q(1), Deng 
X(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Biology (Ministry of Education), 
Huazhong Agricultural University, 430070 Wuhan, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Biology (Ministry of Education), 
Huazhong Agricultural University, 430070 Wuhan, China xxdeng@mail.hzau.edu.cn.

Although remarkable progress has been made toward understanding carotenoid 
biosynthesis, the mechanisms that regulate the transcription of carotenogenic 
genes remain poorly understood. Lycopene β-cyclases (LCYb) are critical enzymes 
located at the branch point of the carotenoid biosynthetic pathway. Here, we 
used the promoter sequence of LCYb1 as bait in a yeast one-hybrid screen for 
promoter-binding proteins from sweet orange (Citrus sinensis). This screen 
identified a MADS transcription factor, CsMADS6, that was coordinately expressed 
with fruit development and coloration. Acting as a nucleus-localized 
transcriptional activator, CsMADS6 directly bound the promoter of LCYb1 and 
activated its expression. Overexpression of CsMADS6 in citrus calli increased 
carotenoid contents and induced the expression of LCYb1 and other carotenogenic 
genes, including phytoene synthase (PSY), phytoene desaturase (PDS), and 
carotenoid cleavage dioxygenase1 (CCD1). CsMADS6 up-regulated the expression of 
PSY, PDS, and CCD1 by directly binding to their promoters, which suggested the 
multitargeted regulation of carotenoid metabolism by CsMADS6. In addition, the 
ectopic expression of CsMADS6 in tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) affected 
carotenoid contents and the expression of carotenogenic genes. The sepals of 
CsMADS6-overexpressing tomato lines exhibited dramatic changes in carotenoid 
profiles, accompanied by changes in plastid ultrastructure. Global transcriptome 
analysis of transgenic sepals revealed that CsMADS6 regulates a series of 
pathways that promote increases in flux through the carotenoid pathway. Overall, 
these findings establish that CsMADS6 directly regulates LCYb1 and other 
carotenogenic genes to coordinately and positively modulate carotenoid 
metabolism in plants, which may provide strategies to improve the nutritional 
quality of crops.

© 2018 American Society of Plant Biologists. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.17.01830
PMCID: PMC5884614
PMID: 29463773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Sci Rep. 2018 Feb 21;8(1):3413. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-21672-8.

A tomato MADS-box protein, SlCMB1, regulates ethylene biosynthesis and 
carotenoid accumulation during fruit ripening.

Zhang J(1), Hu Z(1), Yao Q(1), Guo X(1), Nguyen V(1), Li F(1), Chen G(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of molecular biology of tomato, Bioengineering College, Chongqing 
University, Chongqing, People's Republic of China.
(2)Laboratory of molecular biology of tomato, Bioengineering College, Chongqing 
University, Chongqing, People's Republic of China. chenguoping@cqu.edu.cn.

The MADS-box transcription factors play essential roles in many physiological 
and biochemical processes of plants, especially in fruit ripening. Here, a 
tomato MADS-box gene, SlCMB1, was isolated. SlCMB1 expression declined with the 
fruit ripening from immature green to B + 7 (7 days after Breaker) fruits in the 
wild type (WT) and was lower in Nr and rin mutants fruits. Tomato plants with 
reduced SlCMB1 mRNA displayed delayed fruit ripening, reduced ethylene 
production and carotenoid accumulation. The ethylene production in SlCMB1-RNAi 
fruits decreased by approximately 50% as compared to WT. The transcripts of 
ethylene biosynthesis genes (ACS2, ACS4, ACO1 and ACO3), ethylene-responsive 
genes (E4, E8 and ERF1) and fruit ripening-related genes (RIN, TAGL1, FUL1, 
FUL2, LoxC and PE) were inhibited in SlCMB1-RNAi fruits. The carotenoid 
accumulation was decreased and two carotenoid synthesis-related genes (PSY1 and 
PDS) were down-regulated while three lycopene cyclase genes (CYCB, LCYB and 
LCYE) were up-regulated in transgenic fruits. Furthermore, yeast two-hybrid 
assay showed that SlCMB1 could interact with SlMADS-RIN, SlMADS1, SlAP2a and 
TAGL1, respectively. Collectively, these results indicate that SlCMB1 is a new 
component to the current model of regulatory network that regulates ethylene 
biosynthesis and carotenoid accumulation during fruit ripening.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-21672-8
PMCID: PMC5821886
PMID: 29467500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


226. Synth Syst Biotechnol. 2017 Oct 20;2(4):287-294. doi: 
10.1016/j.synbio.2017.10.002. eCollection 2017 Dec.

Engineering of Yarrowia lipolytica for production of astaxanthin.

Kildegaard KR(1), Adiego-Pérez B(1), Doménech Belda D(1), Khangura JK(1), 
Holkenbrink C(1), Borodina I(1).

Author information:
(1)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical 
University of Denmark, Kemitorvet 220, 2800, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark.

Astaxanthin is a red-colored carotenoid, used as food and feed additive. 
Astaxanthin is mainly produced by chemical synthesis, however, the process is 
expensive and synthetic astaxanthin is not approved for human consumption. In 
this study, we engineered the oleaginous yeast Yarrowia lipolytica for de novo 
production of astaxanthin by fermentation. First, we screened 12 different 
Y. lipolytica isolates for β-carotene production by introducing two genes for 
β-carotene biosynthesis: bi-functional phytoene synthase/lycopene cyclase 
(crtYB) and phytoene desaturase (crtI) from the red yeast Xanthophyllomyces 
dendrorhous. The best strain produced 31.1 ± 0.5 mg/L β-carotene. Next, we 
optimized the activities of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase 
(HMG1) and geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase (GGS1/crtE) in the best producing 
strain and obtained 453.9 ± 20.2 mg/L β-carotene. Additional downregulation of 
the competing squalene synthase SQS1 increased the β-carotene titer to 
797.1 ± 57.2 mg/L. Then we introduced β-carotene ketolase (crtW) from Paracoccus 
sp. N81106 and hydroxylase (crtZ) from Pantoea ananatis to convert β-carotene 
into astaxanthin. The constructed strain accumulated 10.4 ± 0.5 mg/L of 
astaxanthin but also accumulated astaxanthin biosynthesis intermediates, 
5.7 ± 0.5 mg/L canthaxanthin, and 35.3 ± 1.8 mg/L echinenone. Finally, we 
optimized the copy numbers of crtZ and crtW to obtain 3.5 mg/g DCW (54.6 mg/L) 
of astaxanthin in a microtiter plate cultivation. Our study for the first time 
reports engineering of Y. lipolytica for the production of astaxanthin. The high 
astaxanthin content and titer obtained even in a small-scale cultivation 
demonstrates a strong potential for Y. lipolytica-based fermentation process for 
astaxanthin production.

DOI: 10.1016/j.synbio.2017.10.002
PMCID: PMC5851922
PMID: 29552653


227. Plant Physiol Biochem. 2018 Jun;127:143-151. doi:
10.1016/j.plaphy.2018.03.023.  Epub 2018 Mar 21.

Expression of heterologous lycopene β-cyclase gene in flax can cause silencing 
of its endogenous counterpart by changes in gene-body methylation and in ABA 
homeostasis mechanism.

Boba A(1), Kostyn K(2), Preisner M(3), Wojtasik W(4), Szopa J(5), Kulma A(6).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Biotechnology, University of Wroclaw, Przybyszewskiego 63/77, 
51-148 Wroclaw, Poland. Electronic address: aleksandra.boba@uwr.edu.pl.
(2)Faculty of Biotechnology, University of Wroclaw, Przybyszewskiego 63/77, 
51-148 Wroclaw, Poland; Department of Genetics, Plant Breeding and Seed 
Production, Faculty of Life Sciences and Technology, Wroclaw University of 
Environmental and Plant Sciences, Plac Grunwaldzki 24A, 53-363 Wroclaw, Poland. 
Electronic address: kamil.kostyn@upr.edu.pl.
(3)Faculty of Biotechnology, University of Wroclaw, Przybyszewskiego 63/77, 
51-148 Wroclaw, Poland; Department of Genetics, Plant Breeding and Seed 
Production, Faculty of Life Sciences and Technology, Wroclaw University of 
Environmental and Plant Sciences, Plac Grunwaldzki 24A, 53-363 Wroclaw, Poland. 
Electronic address: marta.preisner@upr.edu.pl.
(4)Faculty of Biotechnology, University of Wroclaw, Przybyszewskiego 63/77, 
51-148 Wroclaw, Poland. Electronic address: wioleta.wojtasik@uwr.edu.pl.
(5)Faculty of Biotechnology, University of Wroclaw, Przybyszewskiego 63/77, 
51-148 Wroclaw, Poland; Department of Genetics, Plant Breeding and Seed 
Production, Faculty of Life Sciences and Technology, Wroclaw University of 
Environmental and Plant Sciences, Plac Grunwaldzki 24A, 53-363 Wroclaw, Poland. 
Electronic address: szopa@ibmb.uni.wroc.pl.
(6)Faculty of Biotechnology, University of Wroclaw, Przybyszewskiego 63/77, 
51-148 Wroclaw, Poland. Electronic address: anna.kulma@uwr.edu.pl.

Previously we described flax plants with expression of Arabidopsis lycopene 
β-cyclase (lcb) gene in which decreased expression of the endogenous lcb and 
increased resistance to fungal pathogen was observed. We suggested that 
co-suppression was responsible for the change. In this study we investigated the 
molecular basis of the observed effect in detail. We found that methylation 
changes in the Lulcb gene body might be responsible for repression of the gene. 
Treatment with azacitidine (DNA methylation inhibitor) confirmed the results. 
Moreover, we studied how the manipulation of carotenoid biosynthesis pathway 
increased ABA level in these plants. We suggest that elevated ABA levels may be 
responsible for the increased resistance of the flax plants to pathogen 
infection through activation of chitinase (PR gene).

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2018.03.023
PMID: 29579641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Genes (Basel). 2018 Apr 9;9(4):200. doi: 10.3390/genes9040200.

A Possible Trifunctional β-Carotene Synthase Gene Identified in the Draft Genome 
of Aurantiochytrium sp. Strain KH105.

Iwasaka H(1), Koyanagi R(2), Satoh R(3), Nagano A(4), Watanabe K(5)(6), Hisata 
K(7), Satoh N(8), Aki T(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biotechnology, Graduate School of Advanced Sciences 
of Matter, Hiroshima University, Higashi-Hiroshima 739-8530, Japan. 
wdzra2nhph@gmail.com.
(2)Marine Genomic Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate 
University, Onna, Okinawa 904-0945, Japan. koyanagi@oist.jp.
(3)Department of Molecular Biotechnology, Graduate School of Advanced Sciences 
of Matter, Hiroshima University, Higashi-Hiroshima 739-8530, Japan. 
ctsak9y9g9@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Molecular Biotechnology, Graduate School of Advanced Sciences 
of Matter, Hiroshima University, Higashi-Hiroshima 739-8530, Japan. 
pnsptrui35@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Molecular Biotechnology, Graduate School of Advanced Sciences 
of Matter, Hiroshima University, Higashi-Hiroshima 739-8530, Japan. 
kwatanabe@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.
(6)JST-CREST, Saitama 332-0012, Japan. kwatanabe@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.
(7)Marine Genomic Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate 
University, Onna, Okinawa 904-0945, Japan. kanako@oist.jp.
(8)Marine Genomic Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate 
University, Onna, Okinawa 904-0945, Japan. norisky@oist.jp.
(9)Department of Molecular Biotechnology, Graduate School of Advanced Sciences 
of Matter, Hiroshima University, Higashi-Hiroshima 739-8530, Japan. 
aki@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.
(10)JST-CREST, Saitama 332-0012, Japan. aki@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.

Labyrinthulomycetes have been regarded as a promising industrial source of 
xanthophylls, including astaxanthin and canthaxanthin, polyunsaturated fatty 
acids such as docosahexaenoic acid and docosapentaenoic acid, ω-3 oils, and 
terpenic hydrocarbons, such as sterols and squalene. A Thraustochytrid, 
Aurantiochytrium sp. KH105 produces carotenoids, including astaxanthin, with 
strong antioxidant activity. To gain genomic insights into this capacity, we 
decoded its 97-Mbp genome and characterized genes for enzymes involved in 
carotenoid biosynthesis. Interestingly, all carotenogenic genes, as well as 
other eukaryotic genes, appeared duplicated, suggesting that this strain is 
diploid. In addition, among the five genes involved in the pathway from 
geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate to astaxanthin, geranylgeranyl phytoene synthase 
(crtB), phytoene desaturase (crtI) and lycopene cyclase (crtY) were fused into 
single gene (crtIBY) with no internal stop codons. Functionality of the 
trifunctional enzyme, CrtIBY, to catalyze the reaction from geranylgeranyl 
diphosphate to β-carotene was confirmed using a yeast assay system and mass 
spectrometry. Furthermore, analyses of differential gene expression showed 
characteristic up-regulation of carotenoid biosynthetic genes during stationary 
and starvation phases under these culture conditions. This suggests genetic 
engineering events to promote more efficient production of carotenoids. We also 
showed an occurrence of crtIBY in other Thraustochytrid species.

DOI: 10.3390/genes9040200
PMCID: PMC5924542
PMID: 29642531

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.


229. Plant Sci. 2018 Jul;272:243-254. doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2018.05.005. Epub
2018  May 9.

A lycopene β-cyclase gene, IbLCYB2, enhances carotenoid contents and abiotic 
stress tolerance in transgenic sweetpotato.

Kang C(1), Zhai H(1), Xue L(1), Zhao N(1), He S(2), Liu Q(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Sweetpotato Biology and Biotechnology, Ministry of 
Agriculture/Beijing Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement/Laboratory of 
Crop Heterosis and Utilization, Ministry of Education, College of Agronomy & 
Biotechnology, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Sweetpotato Biology and Biotechnology, Ministry of 
Agriculture/Beijing Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement/Laboratory of 
Crop Heterosis and Utilization, Ministry of Education, College of Agronomy & 
Biotechnology, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China. Electronic 
address: sunnynba@cau.edu.cn.
(3)Key Laboratory of Sweetpotato Biology and Biotechnology, Ministry of 
Agriculture/Beijing Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement/Laboratory of 
Crop Heterosis and Utilization, Ministry of Education, College of Agronomy & 
Biotechnology, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China; College of 
Agronomy, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao 266109, China. Electronic 
address: liuqc@cau.edu.cn.

Lycopene β-cyclase (LCYB) is an essential enzyme that catalyzes the conversion 
of lycopene into α-carotene and β-carotene in carotenoid biosynthesis pathway. 
However, the roles and underlying mechanisms of the LCYB gene in plant responses 
to abiotic stresses are rarely known. This gene has not been used to improve 
carotenoid contents of sweetpotato, Ipomoea batatas (L.) Lam.. In the present 
study, a new allele of the LCYB gene, named IbLCYB2, was isolated from the 
storage roots of sweetpotato line HVB-3. Its overexpression significantly 
increased the contents of α-carotene, β-carotene, lutein, β-cryptoxanthin and 
zeaxanthin and enhanced the tolerance to salt, drought and oxidative stresses in 
the transgenic sweetpotato (cv. Shangshu 19) plants. The genes involved in 
carotenoid and abscisic acid (ABA) biosynthesis pathways and abiotic stress 
responses were up-regulated in the transgenic plants. The ABA and proline 
contents and superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity were significantly increased, 
whereas malonaldehyde (MDA) and H2O2 contents were significantly decreased in 
the transgenic plants under abiotic stresses. The overall results indicate that 
the IbLCYB2 gene enhances carotenoid contents and abiotic stress tolerance 
through positive regulation of carotenoid and ABA biosynthesis pathways in 
sweetpotato. This gene has the potential to improve carotenoid contents and 
abiotic stress tolerance in sweetpotato and other plants.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2018.05.005
PMID: 29807598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Bioprocess Biosyst Eng. 2018 Sep;41(9):1355-1370. doi: 
10.1007/s00449-018-1963-7. Epub 2018 Jun 13.

Enhanced production of carotenoids using a Thraustochytrid microalgal strain 
containing high levels of docosahexaenoic acid-rich oil.

Park H(1), Kwak M(2), Seo J(3), Ju J(3), Heo S(3), Park S(4), Hong W(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biotechnology, College of Environmental and Bioresource Science, 
Chonbuk National University, Iksan, Jeonbuk, 570-752, South Korea.
(2)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute 
of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, 305-701, South Korea.
(3)Applied Microbial Research Center, Jeonbuk Branch Institute, Korea Research 
Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Jeongeup, Jeonbuk, 580-185, 
South Korea.
(4)Division of Biotechnology, College of Environmental and Bioresource Science, 
Chonbuk National University, Iksan, Jeonbuk, 570-752, South Korea. 
smpark@jbnu.ac.kr.
(5)Division of Biotechnology, College of Environmental and Bioresource Science, 
Chonbuk National University, Iksan, Jeonbuk, 570-752, South Korea. 
hongwk@jbnu.ac.kr.

Results to date suggest that microalgal Thraustochytrids family strains can be 
used to produce high-functional omega-3 rich oil (~ 30-70% of dry cell weight) 
and carotenoid-based antioxidant pigments simultaneously with value-added 
bioactive potential. In the present study, we describe the isolation and 
characterization of a new Thraustochytrid Schizochytrium sp. from the west 
coastal area of Korea. This newly isolated Thraustochytrid, identified as 
Schizochytrium sp. through 18S rRNA analysis and named SH104, simultaneously 
produces high levels of DHA and carotenoid-based antioxidant pigments. An 
improved Schizochytrium mutant, named SHG104, was obtained from the original 
host strain by γ-irradiation-induced mutagenesis. Under combined 
temperature-shift cultivation conditions employing white-light LEDs 
(light-emitting diodes), Schizochytrium sp. SHG104 yielded 10.8 g L-1 of biomass 
comprising 45.8% total lipids (32.1% DHA) and 4.6 mg L-1 of astaxanthin. In 
addition to DHA, the main fatty acids produced by Schizochytrium sp. SHG104 were 
palmitic acid and a trace of other long-chain fatty acids. The carotenoid 
profile of SH104 and SHG104 was β-carotene, astaxanthin, canthaxanthin, 
pheonicoxanthin and echinenone, which analyzed by HPLC and LC/APCI-MS. 
Furthermore, genomic analysis of Schizochytrium and Aurantiochytrium microalgae 
confirmed that the presence of carotenogenesis pathway enzymes and genes 
including geranylgeranyl diphosphate, phytoene synthase, lycopene cyclase, and 
cytochrome P450 hydroxylase that necessary for the production of antioxidants 
via a complete biosynthetic KEGG synthesis pathway. This newly isolated 
Schizochytrium microalga potentially have wide application as a source of 
antioxidants for astaxanthin-containing pigments, commercial omega-3 lipids and 
feed additives, such as nutritional supplements for aquaculture.

DOI: 10.1007/s00449-018-1963-7
PMID: 29948212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


231. New Phytol. 2019 Jan;221(1):309-325. doi: 10.1111/nph.15362. Epub 2018 Aug
1.

A kiwifruit (Actinidia deliciosa) R2R3-MYB transcription factor modulates 
chlorophyll and carotenoid accumulation.

Ampomah-Dwamena C(1), Thrimawithana AH(1), Dejnoprat S(1), Lewis D(2), Espley 
RV(1), Allan AC(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)The New Zealand Institute for Plant & Food Research Limited (PFR), Private 
Bag 92 169, Auckland, New Zealand.
(2)The New Zealand Institute for Plant & Food Research Limited (PFR), Private 
Bag 11600, Palmerston North, 4442, New Zealand.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, 
Auckland, New Zealand.

MYB transcription factors (TFs) regulate diverse plant developmental processes 
and understanding their roles in controlling pigment accumulation in fruit is 
important for developing new cultivars. In this study, we characterised 
kiwifruit TFMYB7, which was found to activate the promoter of the kiwifruit 
lycopene beta-cyclase (AdLCY-β) gene that plays a key role in the carotenoid 
biosynthetic pathway. To determine the role of MYB7, we analysed gene expression 
and metabolite profiles in Actinidia fruit which show different pigment 
profiles. The impact of MYB7 on metabolic biosynthetic pathways was then 
evaluated by overexpression in Nicotiana benthamiana followed by metabolite and 
gene expression analysis of the transformants. MYB7 was expressed in fruit that 
accumulated carotenoid and Chl pigments with high transcript levels associated 
with both pigments. Constitutive over-expression of MYB7, through transient or 
stable transformation of N. benthamiana, altered Chl and carotenoid pigment 
levels. MYB7 overexpression was associated with transcriptional activation of 
certain key genes involved in carotenoid biosynthesis, Chl biosynthesis, and 
other processes such as chloroplast and thylakoid membrane organization. Our 
results suggest that MYB7 plays a role in modulating carotenoid and Chl pigment 
accumulation in tissues through transcriptional activation of metabolic pathway 
genes.

© 2018 The Authors. New Phytologist © 2018 New Phytologist Trust.

DOI: 10.1111/nph.15362
PMCID: PMC6585760
PMID: 30067292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Planta. 2019 Jan;249(1):257-270. doi: 10.1007/s00425-018-2970-2. Epub 2018
Aug  6.

Transcriptomic changes triggered by carotenoid biosynthesis inhibitors and role 
of Citrus sinensis phosphate transporter 4;2 (CsPHT4;2) in enhancing carotenoid 
accumulation.

Lu P(1), Wang S(1), Grierson D(1)(2), Xu C(3).

Author information:
(1)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Integrative 
Biology, Zhejiang University, Zijingang Campus, Hangzhou, 310058, China.
(2)Division of Plant and Crop Sciences, School of Biosciences, University of 
Nottingham, Sutton Bonington Campus, Sutton Bonington, LE12 5RD, UK.
(3)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Integrative 
Biology, Zhejiang University, Zijingang Campus, Hangzhou, 310058, China. 
chjxu@zju.edu.cn.

Carotenoid accumulation and chromoplast development in orange were perturbed by 
carotenoid inhibitors, and candidate genes were identified via transcriptomic 
analysis. The role of CsPHT4;2 in enhancing carotenoid accumulation was 
revealed. Carotenoids are important plant pigments and their accumulation can be 
affected by biosynthesis inhibitors, but the genes involved were largely 
unknown. Here, application of norflurazon (NFZ), 
2-(4-chlorophenylthio)-triethylamine hydrochloride (CPTA) and clomazone for 
30 days to in vitro cultured sweet orange juice vesicles caused 
over-accumulation of phytoene (over 1000-fold), lycopene (2.92 μg g-1 FW, none 
in control), and deficiency in total carotenoids (reduced to 22%), respectively. 
Increased carotenoids were associated with bigger chromoplasts with enlarged 
plastoglobules or a differently crystalline structure in NFZ, and CPTA-treated 
juice vesicles, respectively. Global transcriptomic changes following inhibitor 
treatments were profiled. Induced expression of 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate 
synthase 1 by CPTA, hydroxymethylbutenyl 4-diphosphate reductase by both NFZ and 
CPTA, and reduced expression of chromoplast-specific lycopene β-cyclase by CPTA, 
as well as several downstream genes by at least one of the three inhibitors were 
observed. Expression of fibrillin 11 (CsFBN11) was induced following both NFZ 
and CPTA treatments. Using weighted correlation network analysis, a plastid-type 
phosphate transporter 4;2 (CsPHT4;2) was identified as closely correlated with 
high-lycopene accumulation induced by CPTA. Transient over-expression of 
CsPHT4;2 significantly enhanced carotenoid accumulation over tenfold in 'Cara 
Cara' sweet orange juice vesicle-derived callus. The study provides a valuable 
overview of the underlying mechanisms for altered carotenoid accumulation and 
chromoplast development following carotenoid inhibitor treatments and sheds 
light on the relationship between carotenoid accumulation and chromoplast 
development.

DOI: 10.1007/s00425-018-2970-2
PMID: 30083809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Methods Mol Biol. 2018;1852:257-268. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-8742-9_15.

Lycopene Production by Mated Fermentation of Blakeslea trispora.

Martínez-Cámara S(1), Rubio S(1), Del Río H(1), Rodríguez-Sáiz M(1), Barredo 
JL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Crystal Pharma, A Subsidiary of Albany Molecular 
Research Inc. (AMRI), Parque Tecnológico de León, León, Spain.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Crystal Pharma, A Subsidiary of Albany Molecular 
Research Inc. (AMRI), Parque Tecnológico de León, León, Spain. 
joseluis.barredo@amriglobal.com.

Lycopene is a carotenoid mainly present in red-colored fruits and vegetables. 
Its value in the pharmaceutical and food industry is linked to its benefits for 
the human health, including properties against cancer and cardiovascular 
diseases, and its use as a food colorant. Lycopene can be produced either by 
synthetic or natural means, but there is a preference for the second, since it 
is considered a more eco-friendly and less harmful process. Among natural 
methods for obtaining lycopene, microbial fermentation is a good alternative to 
extraction from plants that naturally contain lycopene, since it implies 
obtaining higher and more specific amounts of this carotenoid. This chapter 
describes lycopene production by fermentation of the fungus Blakeslea trispora, 
a naturally carotenoid producer, at 30 L scale. This procedure involves 
separated growth of the two sexual mating types of B. trispora during the 
vegetative stages and the use of a lycopene cyclase inhibitor to achieve 
lycopene accumulation during the production stage.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-8742-9_15
PMID: 30109636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Mikrobiol Z. 2016 Nov-Dec;78(6):60-70.

Sequences of Landomycin E and Carotenoid Biosynthetic Gene Clusters, and 
Molecular Structure of Transcriptional Regulator of Streptomyces globisporus 
1912.

Matselyukh BP, Polishchuk LV, Lukyanchuk VV, Golembiovska SL, Lavrenchuk VY.

Streptomyces globisporus 1912 and its derivatives 1912-2 and 1912-4Crt are the 
producers of the landomycin E, carotenoids and the regulator of antibiotics 
biosynthesis and morphogenesis of streptomycetes. The genome DNA of two mutant 
strains, 1912-2, the more effective producer of the landomycin E and the 
regulator, and 1912-4Crt, the producer of beta-carotene and lycopene, was 
sequenced by Illumina. Comparative analysis of the DNA sequences using GenBank 
data allowed localization of 36 landomycin E biosynthetic genes lnd of S. 
globisporus 1912 in one cluster. Twenty of these lnd genes have been sequenced 
for the first time. The new regulatory responce gene lndRR and the sensor kinase 
gene lndY1 were proposed as the members of the putative two-component system. 
High identity (94 – 95 %) was determined for the lnd genes of the 1912 strain 
and those of the metagenomic clone AZ97. Seven carotenoid biosynthetic genes crt 
of the strain 1912-4Crt were sequenced and localized in one cluster consisting 
of two convergent operons from 4 and 3 crt genes. High homology (93 %) of the 
crt gene clusters of S. globisporus 1912 and S. griseus IFO 13350 was shown. Two 
non-punctual repeats (NPRs) of 21 bp were identified in the sequence of crtY 
gene coding lycopene cyclase. It was shown that the deletion of 117 bp including 
the sequence between NPRs of 96 bp and one NPR from 5`-side activated the crt 
gene cluster and increased the production of beta carotene (6.91 mg/l) and 
lycopene (3.24 mg/l) by the strain 1912-4Crt. Deletion of 86 bp was revealed in 
the regulatory gene lndRR resulting in the deficiency of landomycin E production 
in the strain 1912-4Crt. The DNA sequences of crt and lnd genes of S. 
globisporus 1912 were submitted to the NCBI database with accession numbers 
KM349312 and KJ645792, respectively. S. globisporus 1912 produced a 
low-molecular-weight compound that, like A-factor, restored the landomycin E and 
streptomycin biosynthesis and sporulation of the defective mutants S. 
globisporus 1912-B2 and S. griseus 1439, respectively. The compound was purified 
by thin layer chromatography and HPLC. It had an absorption maximum at λmax= 245 
nm and a molecular mass m/z 244. On the basis of NMR spectroscopy the chemical 
structure of the transcriptional regulator was elucidated as the new 
(L)-N-methylphenylalanyl-dehydrobutyrine diketopiperazine.

PMID: 30141884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Food Chem. 2019 Jan 30;272:49-57. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2018.08.020. Epub
2018  Aug 7.

Variations in chlorophyll and carotenoid contents and expression of genes 
involved in pigment metabolism response to oleocellosis in citrus fruits.

Xie J(1), Yao S(2), Ming J(2), Deng L(2), Zeng K(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Food Science, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, PR China.
(2)College of Food Science, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, PR China; 
Chongqing Engineering Research Center of Regional Food, Chongqing 400715, PR 
China.
(3)College of Food Science, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, PR China; 
Chongqing Engineering Research Center of Regional Food, Chongqing 400715, PR 
China. Electronic address: zengkaifang@hotmail.com.

Yellow or green spots related to pigment changes found at the early stage of 
oleocellosis can cause severe economic damage. However, little information 
exists on pigment changes during oleocellosis development, so this study 
investigated the main changes in chlorophyll and carotenoid metabolites and 
related gene expression. Among the variations, the increased contents of 
chlorophyll a and b, and decreased concentrations of lutein, β-cryptoxanthin, 
zeaxanthin, violaxanthin, α-carotene and β-carotene were responsible for 
chlorophyll and carotenoid changes, respectively. Regarding gene expression, the 
up-regulated genes, magnesium chelatase subunit H (MgCh), 
magnesium-protoporphyrin IX monomethyl ester (oxidative) cyclase 1/2 (MPEC1/2), 
protochlorophyllide reductase a, chloroplastic 1/2 (PORA1/2) and chlorophyllide 
a oxygenase (CAO), regarding chlorophyll synthesis as well as the down-regulated 
genes, phytoene synthase (PSY), phytoene dehydrogenase (PDS), lycopene β-cyclase 
(LCYb), and zeaxanthin epoxidase 1/2 (ZEP 1/2) and the up-regulated genes 
(+)-abscisic acid 8'-hydroxylase 1/2 (ABA-HX 1/2), regarding carotenoid 
metabolism, constituted the major variations in oleocellosis peels.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2018.08.020
PMID: 30309573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


236. PLoS One. 2018 Dec 10;13(12):e0208948. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0208948. 
eCollection 2018.

Identification of Lycopene epsilon cyclase (LCYE) gene mutants to potentially 
increase β-carotene content in durum wheat (Triticum turgidum L.ssp. durum) 
through TILLING.

Richaud D(1), Stange C(2), Gadaleta A(3), Colasuonno P(3), Parada R(1), 
Schwember AR(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Fitomejoramiento Molecular, Facultad de Agronomía e Ingeniería 
Forestal, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(2)Laboratorio de Biología Molecular Vegetal, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad 
de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(3)Department of Environmental and Territorial Sciences (DiSAAT), University of 
Bari "Aldo Moro", Bari, Italy.

Increasing β-carotene (a vitamin A precursor) content in Triticum turgidum L. 
ssp. durum (durum wheat) grains is important to improve pasta nutritional 
quality. Studies in other species show that altering the expression of LCYE 
genes increases the flux towards the β-β branch, accumulating higher β-carotene 
levels. Durum wheat is a tetraploid species that has two LCYE genes (LCYE-A and 
LCYE-B) associated to the A and B genomes. The objective of this work was to 
produce durum wheat LCYE mutants through EMS to potentially increase β-carotene 
content. The LCYE point mutations created with EMS were identified using a 
Kronos TILLING (Targeting Induced Local Lesion IN Genomes) mutant population. 
Specific primers that amplified exons 3 through 10 of the LCYE genes were 
designed and validated. To simplify the TILLING procedure, fragments were 
digested with CJE (Celery Juice Extract) and visualized on 2% agarose gels. 6X 
mutant pools were identified, which showed cleavage products and then made into 
2X pools to identify mutant individuals. LCYE mutants were then sequenced and 
evaluated with BLOSUM62, SIFT and PSSM algorithms. Mutants with substitutions 
W437*, P334L and G368R in LCYE-A and P405L, G352R and T393I in LCYE-B predicted 
to affect protein function were selected. Substitution W437* increased 
β-carotene in 75% and overall total carotenoids content in leaves of the mutant 
2426 (A1 mutant line), but no significant differences relative to the control 
were found in grains through HPLC. Finally, the increased levels of β-carotene 
on leaves have potential applications to improving plant resistance under 
contaminated environmental conditions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0208948
PMCID: PMC6287857
PMID: 30532162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


237. Mol Biol Rep. 2019 Feb;46(1):1167-1179. doi: 10.1007/s11033-018-04583-9.
Epub  2019 Jan 16.

Differential transcriptional responses of carotenoid biosynthesis genes in the 
marine green alga Tetraselmis suecica exposed to redox and non-redox active 
metals.

Sathasivam R(1), Ki JS(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Sangmyung University, Seoul, 03016, South Korea.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Sangmyung University, Seoul, 03016, South Korea. 
kijs@smu.ac.kr.
(3)Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California San Diego, San 
Diego, CA, 92037, USA. kijs@smu.ac.kr.

The green microalga, Tetraselmis suecica, is commonly used in scientific, 
industrial, and aquacultural purposes because of its high stress tolerance and 
ease of culture in wide spectrums of environments. We hypothesized that 
carotenoids help to protect Tetraselmis cells from environmental stress by 
regulating genes in biosynthetic pathways. Here, we determined three major 
carotenogenic genes, phytoene synthase (PSY), phytoene desaturase (PDS), and 
β-lycopene cyclase (LCY-B) in T. suecica, and examined the physiological 
parameters and gene expression responses when exposed to redox-active metals and 
non-redox-active metals. Phylogenetic analyses of each gene indicated that T. 
suecica clustered well with other green algae. Real-time PCR analysis showed 
that TsPSY, TsPDS, and TsLCY-B genes greatly responded to the redox-active 
metals in CuSO4 followed by CuCl2, but not to the non-redox-active metals. The 
redox-active metals strongly affected the physiology of the cells, as determined 
by cell counting, reactive oxygen species (ROS) imaging, and photosynthetic 
efficiency. This suggests that carotenoids protect the cells from oxidative 
damage caused by metals, thereby contributing to cell survival under various 
stress conditions.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-018-04583-9
PMID: 30649658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


238. BMC Genomics. 2019 Jan 16;20(1):49. doi: 10.1186/s12864-018-5388-0.

Exploring the differential mechanisms of carotenoid biosynthesis in the yellow 
peel and red flesh of papaya.

Shen YH(1)(2), Yang FY(3), Lu BG(4), Zhao WW(3), Jiang T(5), Feng L(3), Chen 
XJ(3), Ming R(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)College of Horticulture Science and Technology, Hebei Normal University of 
Science and Technology, Qinhuangdao, 066004, Hebei, China. 
papayacrazy@aliyun.com.
(2)College of Horticulture, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou, 
350002, Fujian, China. papayacrazy@aliyun.com.
(3)College of Horticulture, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou, 
350002, Fujian, China.
(4)College of Life Science, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, 350117, Fujian, 
China.
(5)College of Horticulture Science and Technology, Hebei Normal University of 
Science and Technology, Qinhuangdao, 066004, Hebei, China.
(6)FAFU and UIUC-SIB Joint Center for Genomics and Biotechnology, Haixia 
Institute of Science and Technology, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, 
Fuzhou, 350002, Fujian, China. rayming@illinois.edu.
(7)Department of Plant Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 
Urbana, IL, 61801, USA. rayming@illinois.edu.

BACKGROUND: Red-fleshed papaya is a good material to study the different 
carotenoids accumulation mechanism in the peel and flesh. Although the peel and 
flesh of papaya closely integrated into one body, the flesh coloration changing 
from white to red, while the exocarp coloration changing from green to yellow. 
In this study, the major carotenoids accumulation and the expression patterns of 
key carotenoid biosynthesis pathway genes in the process of papaya fruit 
ripening were studied, and the carotenoid biosynthetic pathways in the yellow 
peel and red flesh of papaya were investigated.
RESULTS: The carotenoid composition in papaya flesh and peel were different. The 
major carotenoids were lutein and β-carotene in the peel, while lycopene in the 
flesh. The accumulation of carotenoids, including lycopene, β-carotene, and 
β-cryptoxanthin were considered to cause the orange-red color of papaya cv. 
'Daqing No.10' flesh. The color of peel changed from green to yellow because of 
the fast degradation of chlorophyll and the appearance of carotenoids such 
as lutein and β-carotene. Thirteen genes that encode enzymes in the carotenoid 
biosynthetic pathway were detected in papaya fruit transcriptome: two phytoene 
synthase (PSY1, PSY2), two phytoene desaturase (PDS1, PDS2), one ζ-carotene 
desaturase (ZDS), four lycopene cyclase (CYCB, LCYB1, LCYB2, LCYE), one 
β-carotene hydroxylase (CHYB), one carotene ε-monooxygenase (LUT1), one 
violaxanthin de-epoxidase (VDE), and one zeaxanthin epoxidase (ZEP). The results 
of RNA-Seq and RT-qPCR showed the expression of carotenoid biosynthetic pathway 
genes was consistent with the change of carotenoid content. Carotenoid 
biosynthetic pathways in the yellow peel and red flesh of papaya were analysed 
based on the major carotenoids accumulation and the expression patterns of key 
carotenoid biosynthesis pathway genes. There was only a β-branch of carotenoid 
biosynthesis in the flesh of papaya, while there were both α- and β-branch of 
carotenoid biosynthesis in papaya peel. In the process of papaya fruit ripening, 
the α-branch was inhibited and the β-branch was enhanced in the peel.
CONCLUSIONS: The differential carotenoid accumulation and biosynthesis pathway 
genes expression in peel and flesh, lay a foundation for further study and 
provide further insights to control fruit color and improve fruit quality and 
appearance.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-018-5388-0
PMCID: PMC6335806
PMID: 30651061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.


239. Funct Integr Genomics. 2019 Jul;19(4):565-574. doi:
10.1007/s10142-019-00654-7.  Epub 2019 Jan 29.

Implication of salt stress induces changes in pigment production, antioxidant 
enzyme activity, and qRT-PCR expression of genes involved in the biosynthetic 
pathway of Bixa orellana L.

Sankari M(1), Hridya H(2), Sneha P(1), Doss CGP(1), Christopher JG(1), Mathew 
J(1), Zayed H(3), Ramamoorthy S(4).

Author information:
(1)School of BioSciences and Technology, VIT, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, 632014, 
India.
(2)Muga silkworm seed organisation, Central Silk Board, Guwahati, Assam, 781038, 
India.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Sciences, Qatar 
University, Doha, Qatar.
(4)School of BioSciences and Technology, VIT, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, 632014, 
India. siva.ramamoorthy@gmail.com.

The effect of salt stress on pigment synthesis and antioxidant enzyme activity 
as well as in the genes involved in the biosynthetic pathway of bixin was 
studied. The 14-day germinated seedlings of Bixa orellana were induced into the 
various NaCl concentration (0, 25, 50, 75, 100 mM). After 45 days, leaves were 
taken for pigment analysis, antioxidant assays, and gene expression analysis to 
study the response of salt stress. The pigment content such as chlorophyll level 
was increased upon salt stress with a reduction in total carotenoid clearly 
indicating the adaptability of plants towards the stressed state. The level of 
β-carotene was increased in the highest concentration of salt stress treatment. 
The secondary metabolites such as bixin and abscisic acid (ABA) content were 
also high in elevated concentration of salt-treated seedling than control. The 
antioxidant enzyme activity was increased with the highest dose of salt stress 
suggesting the antioxidant enzymes to protect the plant from the deleterious 
effects. The mRNA transcript gene of the carotenoid biosynthetic pathway such as 
phytoene synthase (PSY), 1-deoxyxylulose-5-phosphate synthase (DXS), phytoene 
desaturase (PDS), beta-lycopene cyclase (LCY-β), epsilon lycopene cyclase 
(LCY-ε), carboxyl methyl transferase (CMT), aldehyde dehydrogenase (ADH), 
lycopene cleavage dioxygenase (LCD), and carotenoid cleavage dioxygenase (CCD) 
showed differential expression pattern under salt stress. In addendum, we 
studied the co-expression network analysis of gene to assess the co-related 
genes associated in the biosynthesis pathway of carotenoid. From the 
co-expression analysis result showed, the LCY, PDS, and PSY genes were closely 
correlated with other genes. These finding may provide insight to the plants to 
exist in the stress condition and to improve the industrially important pigment 
production.

DOI: 10.1007/s10142-019-00654-7
PMID: 30694406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Food Chem. 2019 Jun 15;283:131-140. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2018.12.121.
Epub  2019 Jan 14.

Lycopene cyclases determine high α-/β-carotene ratio and increased carotenoids 
in bananas ripening at high temperatures.

Fu X(1), Cheng S(2), Feng C(2), Kang M(2), Huang B(3), Jiang Y(1), Duan X(1), 
Grierson D(4), Yang Z(5).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of South China Agricultural Plant Molecular Analysis and 
Genetic Improvement & Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Applied Botany, 
South China Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xingke Road 723, 
Tianhe District, Guangzhou 510650, China; College of Advanced Agricultural 
Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 19A Yuquan Road, 
Beijing 100049, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of South China Agricultural Plant Molecular Analysis and 
Genetic Improvement & Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Applied Botany, 
South China Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xingke Road 723, 
Tianhe District, Guangzhou 510650, China.
(3)Institute of Fruit Tree Research, Guangdong Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Guangzhou 510640, China.
(4)Plant & Crop Sciences Division, School of Biosciences, University of 
Nottingham, Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough LE12 5RD, UK; College of 
Agriculture and Biotechnology/Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of 
Horticultural Plant Integrative Biology, Zhejiang University, Zijingang Campus, 
Hangzhou 310058, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of South China Agricultural Plant Molecular Analysis and 
Genetic Improvement & Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Applied Botany, 
South China Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xingke Road 723, 
Tianhe District, Guangzhou 510650, China; College of Advanced Agricultural 
Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 19A Yuquan Road, 
Beijing 100049, China. Electronic address: zyyang@scbg.ac.cn.

Bananas are a recommended food source to alleviate vitamin A deficiency because 
they contain a high ratio of provitamin A precursors. The objective of this 
study was to investigate carotenoid accumulation pattern in banana fruits during 
postharvest ripening and the mechanisms regulating this process. Ripe banana 
pulp had an unusually high α-/β-carotene ratio (1.05), and the carotenoid 
contents increased (p ≤ 0.05) under light and high temperature. We analyzed the 
sequences, transcript levels, and functions of genes involved in carotenoid 
synthesis. The high ratio of α-/β-carotene in ripe banana fruit was explained by 
the high flux to the α-carotene biosynthetic pathway, as reflected by high 
transcript levels of LCYE, and the weak flux to the β-carotene branch of the 
biosynthetic pathway due to inactive MaLCYB1.2. High temperature during ripening 
up-regulated the transcript levels of genes involved in the α- and β-carotene 
biosynthesis pathways and the activities of their encoded enzymes.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2018.12.121
PMID: 30722852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]241. Plant Sci. 2019 Apr;281:52-60. doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2019.01.002. Epub
2019  Jan 10.

Down-regulation of lycopene ε-cyclase expression in transgenic sweetpotato 
plants increases the carotenoid content and tolerance to abiotic stress.

Ke Q(1), Kang L(2), Kim HS(3), Xie T(1), Liu C(1), Ji CY(3), Kim SH(3), Park 
WS(4), Ahn MJ(4), Wang S(1), Li H(1), Deng X(1), Kwak SS(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Soil and Water Conservation, Northwest A & F University, 
Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China.
(2)College of Environmental Science and Engineering, China West Normal 
University, Nanchong, Sichuan 637002, China.
(3)Plant Systems Engineering Research Center, Korea Research Institute of 
Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), 125 Gwahak-ro, Daejeon 34141, Republic of 
Korea.
(4)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Life Sciences, Gyeongsang 
National University, 501 Jinjudae-ro, Jinju 52828, Republic of Korea.
(5)Plant Systems Engineering Research Center, Korea Research Institute of 
Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), 125 Gwahak-ro, Daejeon 34141, Republic of 
Korea. Electronic address: sskwak@kribb.re.kr.

Carotenoids are required for many biological processes in plants and humans. 
Lycopene ε-cyclase (LCY-ε) catalyzes the conversion of lycopene into lutein via 
the α-branch carotenoid biosynthesis pathway. Down-regulation of IbLCY-ε by RNAi 
increases carotenoid accumulation and salt stress tolerance in transgenic 
sweetpotato calli. As the role of IbLCY-ε in carotenoid biosynthesis and 
environmental stress responses in whole plants is poorly understood, transgenic 
sweetpotato (RLE plants) with reduced expression of IbLCY-ε were developed. RLE 
plants contained higher levels of total carotenoid and β-carotene, due to an 
elevated β-carotene/lutein ratio rather than increased de novo biosynthesis. RLE 
plants showed high reactive oxygen species/radical-scavenging activity. They 
also exhibited an enhanced tolerance of both salt and drought stress, which was 
associated with lower membrane permeability and a higher photosynthetic rate, 
respectively. Elevated carotenoid accumulation in RLE plants mitigated the 
reductions in leaf photosystem II efficiency and chlorophyll induced by abiotic 
stress. Expression of the carotenoid cleavage genes 9-cis-epoxycarotenoid 
dioxygenase, carotenoid cleavage dioxygenase 1 (CCD1) and CCD4 was higher in RLE 
plants, as was abscisic acid accumulation. IbLCY-ε silencing thus offers an 
effective approach for developing sweetpotato plants with increased tolerance to 
abiotic stress that will grow on global marginal lands with no reduction in 
nutritional value.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2019.01.002
PMID: 30824061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Agric Food Chem. 2019 Apr 17;67(15):4300-4310. doi:
10.1021/acs.jafc.9b00756.  Epub 2019 Apr 3.

Manipulation of Carotenoid Metabolic Flux by Lycopene Cyclization in Ripening 
Red Pepper ( Capsicum annuum var. conoides) Fruits.

Wang Q(1), Cao TJ(1), Zheng H(1), Zhou CF(1), Wang Z(2), Wang R(2), Lu S(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences 
, Nanjing University , Nanjing 210023 , China.
(2)Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute , Zhengzhou 450001 , China.

Carotenoids are essential phytonutrients for the human body. Higher plants 
usually synthesize and accumulate carotenoids in their leaves, flowers, and 
fruits. Most carotenoids have either two β-rings on both ends or β- and ε-rings 
separately on two ends of their molecules and are synthesized from the acyclic 
lycopene as the precursor. Lycopene β- and ε-cyclases (LCYB and LCYE, 
respectively) catalyze the β- and ε-cyclization of lycopene, respectively, and 
regulate the metabolic flux from lycopene to its downstream β,β-branches (by 
LCYB alone) and β,ε-branches (by LCYE and LCYB). In this study, we identified 
and characterized genes for two LCYBs (CaLCYB1 and CaLCYB2), one LCYE (CaLCYE1), 
and a capsanthin/capsorubin synthase (CaCCS1) which is also able to β-cyclize 
lycopene from the red pepper ( Capsicum annuum var. conoides) genome. By 
quantifying transcript abundances of these genes and contents of different 
carotenoid components in ripening fruits, we observed a correlation between the 
induction of both CaLCYBs and the accumulation of carotenoids of the β,β-branch 
during ripening. Although capsanthin was accumulated in ripened fruits, our 
quantification demonstrated a strong induction of CaCCS1 at the breaker stage, 
together with the simultaneous repression of CaLCYE1 and the decrease of lutein 
content, suggesting the involvement of CaCCS1 in competing against CaLCYE1 for 
synthesizing carotenoids of the β,β-branch. Our results provide important 
information for future metabolic engineering studies to manipulate carotenoid 
biosynthesis and accumulation in fruits.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jafc.9b00756
PMID: 30908022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Mol Biotechnol. 2019 Sep;61(9):703-713. doi: 10.1007/s12033-019-00197-z.

Functional Analysis of the Marigold (Tagetes erecta) Lycopene ε-cyclase (TeLCYe) 
Promoter in Transgenic Tobacco.

Zhang C(1), Wang Y(1), Wang W(1), Cao Z(2), Fu Q(1), Bao M(1), He Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Biology, Ministry of Education, College 
of Horticulture and Forestry Sciences, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 
430070, Hubei, China.
(2)Crop Development Centre/Department of Plant Sciences, University of 
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, S7N5A8, Canada.
(3)Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Biology, Ministry of Education, College 
of Horticulture and Forestry Sciences, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 
430070, Hubei, China. hyh2010@mail.hzau.edu.cn.

Lycopene ε-cyclases (LCYEs) are key enzymes in carotenoid biosynthesis 
converting red lycopene to downstream lutein. The flowers of marigold (Tagetes 
erecta) have been superior sources to supply lutein. However, the 
transcriptional regulatory mechanisms of LCYe in lutein synthesis are still 
unclear in marigold. In this work, the expression pattern of the TeLCYe gene in 
marigold indicated that TeLCYe mainly expressed in floral organs. To gain a 
better understanding of the expression and regulatory mechanism of TeLCYe gene, 
the TeLCYe promoter was isolated, sequenced, and analyzed through bioinformatics 
tools. The results suggested that the sequence of TeLCYe promoter contained 
various putative cis-acting elements responsive to exogenous and endogenous 
factors. The full-length TeLCYe promoter and three 5'-deletion fragments were 
fused to the GUS reporter gene and transferred into tobacco to test the promoter 
activities. A strong GUS activity was observed in stems of seedlings, leaves of 
seedlings, middle stems, top leaves, petals, stamens, and stigmas in transgenic 
tobacco containing full-length TeLCYe promoter LP0-2086. Deletion of - 910 to 
- 429 bp 5' to ATG significantly increased the GUS activity in chloroplast-rich 
tissues and floral organs, while deletion occurring from 1170 to 910 bp upstream 
ATG decreased the TeLCYe promoter strength in stems of seedlings, leaves of 
seedlings, top leaves and sepals. Functional characterization of the full-length 
TeLCYe promoter and its' deletion fragments in stable transgenic tobacco 
indicated that the LP0-2086 contains some specific cis-acting elements, which 
might result in the high-level expression of in floral organs, and LP2-910 might 
contain some specific cis-acting elements which improved GUS activities in 
vegetable tissues.

DOI: 10.1007/s12033-019-00197-z
PMID: 31286381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Agric Food Chem. 2019 Aug 28;67(34):9560-9568. doi:
10.1021/acs.jafc.9b02597.  Epub 2019 Aug 15.

Elevated β-Carotene Synthesis by the Engineered Rhodobacter sphaeroides with 
Enhanced CrtY Expression.

Qiang S(1)(2), Su AP(1), Li Y(3), Chen Z(3), Hu CY(4), Meng YH(1).

Author information:
(1)Shaanxi Engineering Lab for Food Green Processing and Security Control, 
College of Food Engineering and Nutritional Science , Shaanxi Normal University 
, 620 West Chang'an Avenue , Chang'an, Xi'an 710119 , P. R. China.
(2)Xi'an Healthful Biotechnology Co., Ltd. , HangTuo Road , Chang'an, Xi'an 
710100 , P. R. China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology , China Agricultural University , 
No. 2 Yuanmingyuan West Road , Haidian District, Beijing 100193 , P. R. China.
(4)Human Nutrition, Food, and Animal Science , University of Hawai'i at Manoa , 
1955 East-West Road, AgSci. 415J , Honolulu , Hawaii 96822-2217 , United States.

β-Carotene is a precursor of vitamin A and a dietary supplement for its 
antioxidant property. Producing β-carotene by microbial fermentation has 
attracted much attention owing to consumers' preference for the natural product. 
In this study, an engineered photosynthetic Rhodobacter sphaeroides producing 
β-carotene was constructed by the following strategies: (1) five promoters of 
different strengths were used to investigate the effect of the expression level 
of crtY on β-carotene content. It was found that PrrnB increased the β-carotene 
content by 109%. (2) blocking of the branched pentose phosphate pathway by zwf 
deletion, and (3) overexpressing dxs could restore the transcriptional levels of 
crtE and crtB. Finally, the engineered RS-C3 has the highest β-carotene content 
of 14.93 mg/g dry cell weight (DCW) among all of the reported photosynthetic 
bacteria and the β-carotene content reached 3.34 mg/g DCW under light 
conditions. Our results will be available for industrial use to supply a large 
quantity of natural β-carotene.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jafc.9b02597
PMID: 31368704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Enzyme Microb Technol. 2019 Dec;131:109426. doi: 
10.1016/j.enzmictec.2019.109426. Epub 2019 Sep 9.

The bifunctional identification of both lycopene β- and ε-cyclases from the 
lutein-rich Dunaliella bardawil.

Liang MH(1), Liang ZC(1), Chen HH(1), Jiang JG(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Food Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, 
Guangzhou, 510640, China.
(2)School of Food Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, 
Guangzhou, 510640, China. Electronic address: jgjiang@scut.edu.cn.

The halophilic green alga Dunaliella bardawil FACHB-847 is rich in lutein and 
α-carotene, which has great potential for carotenoid production in open ponds. 
In this study, genes encoding lycopene β- and ε-cyclases (DbLcyB and DbLcyE) 
from D. bardawil FACHB-847 were functionally identified by genetic 
complementation in E. coli. The bifunctional DbLcyB not only catalyzed the 
formation of both mono- and bi-cyclic β-rings with a major β-cyclase activity, 
but also possessed a weak ε-cyclase activity. In contrast, DbLcyE preferred to 
convert lycopene into monocyclic δ-carotene, and possessed a weak β-monocyclase 
activity. Lutein and α-carotene were the prominent carotenoids in D. bardawil 
FACHB-847, which was in agreement with the result of genetic complementation of 
co-expression of DbLcyB and DbLcyE in E. coli with α-carotene as the prominent 
product. The bifunctional DbLcyB and DbLcyE may contribute to the high 
accumulation of α-carotene in D. bardawil FACHB-847. Interestingly, the 
accumulation of lutein in D. bardawil FACHB-847 was more sensitive to salt 
stress, while the accumulation of β-carotene in D. salina CCAP 19/18 was induced 
by salt stress. In brief, the production of different carotenoid compositions 
from these two Dunaliella species can be induced by different growth conditions.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.enzmictec.2019.109426
PMID: 31615667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Mar Drugs. 2019 Oct 31;17(11):621. doi: 10.3390/md17110621.

Improved Astaxanthin Production with Corynebacterium glutamicum by Application 
of a Membrane Fusion Protein.

Henke NA(1), Wendisch VF(2).

Author information:
(1)Genetics of Prokaryotes, Faculty of Biology & CeBiTec, Bielefeld University, 
P.O. Box 10 01 31, 33501 Bielefeld, Germany. n.henke@uni-bielefeld.de.
(2)Genetics of Prokaryotes, Faculty of Biology & CeBiTec, Bielefeld University, 
P.O. Box 10 01 31, 33501 Bielefeld, Germany. Volker.wendisch@uni-bielefeld.de.

Astaxanthin is one of the strongest natural antioxidants and a red pigment 
occurring in nature. This C40 carotenoid is used in a broad range of 
applications such as a colorant in the feed industry, an antioxidant in 
cosmetics or as a supplement in human nutrition. Natural astaxanthin is on the 
rise and, hence, alternative production systems are needed. The natural 
carotenoid producer Corynebacterium glutamicum is a potent host for industrial 
fermentations, such as million-ton scale amino acid production. In C. 
glutamicum, astaxanthin production was established through heterologous 
overproduction of the cytosolic lycopene cyclase CrtY and the membrane-bound 
β-carotene hydroxylase and ketolase, CrtZ and CrtW, in previous studies. In this 
work, further metabolic engineering strategies revealed that the potential of 
this GRAS organism for astaxanthin production is not fully exploited yet. It was 
shown that the construction of a fusion protein comprising the membrane-bound 
β-carotene hydroxylase and ketolase (CrtZ~W) significantly increased astaxanthin 
production under high glucose concentration. An evaluation of used carbon 
sources indicated that a combination of glucose and acetate facilitated 
astaxanthin production. Moreover, additional overproduction of cytosolic 
carotenogenic enzymes increased the production of this high value compound. 
Taken together, a seven-fold improvement of astaxanthin production was achieved 
with 3.1 mg/g CDW of astaxanthin.

DOI: 10.3390/md17110621
PMCID: PMC6891673
PMID: 31683510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.


247. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Nov 14;20(22):5703. doi: 10.3390/ijms20225703.

Provitamin A Biofortification of Durum Wheat through a TILLING Approach.

Sestili F(1), Garcia-Molina MD(1), Gambacorta G(1), Beleggia R(2), Botticella 
E(1), De Vita P(2), Savatin DV(1), Masci S(1), Lafiandra D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Agriculture and Forest Sciences, University of Tuscia, 01100 
Viterbo, Italy.
(2)Council for Agricultural Research and Economics (CREA), Research Centre for 
Cereal and Industrial Crops (CREA-CI), 71122 Foggia, Italy.

Macro- and micronutrients, essential for the maintenance of human metabolism, 
are assimilated daily through the diet. Wheat and other major cereals are a good 
source of nutrients, such as carbohydrates and proteins, but cannot supply a 
sufficient amount of essential micronutrients, including provitamin A. As 
vitamin A deficiency (VAD) leads to several serious diseases throughout the 
world, the biofortification of a major staple crop, such as wheat, represents an 
effective way to preserve human health in developing countries. In the present 
work, a key enzyme involved in the branch of carotenoids pathway producing 
β-carotene, lycopene epsilon cyclase, has been targeted by a Targeting Induced 
Local Lesions in Genomes (TILLING) approach in a "block strategy" perspective. 
The null mutant genotype showed a strong reduction in the expression of the lcyE 
gene and also interesting pleiotropic effects on an enzyme (β-ring hydroxylase) 
acting downstream in the pathway. Biochemical profiling of carotenoids in the 
wheat mutant lines showed an increase of roughly 75% in β-carotene in the grains 
of the complete mutant line compared with the control. In conclusion, we 
describe here the production and characterization of a new wheat line 
biofortified with provitamin A obtained through a nontransgenic approach, which 
also sheds new light on the molecular mechanism governing carotenoid 
biosynthesis in durum wheat.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20225703
PMCID: PMC6888361
PMID: 31739436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.


248. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2019 Nov 25;7:347. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2019.00347. 
eCollection 2019.

Comparative Metabolic Responses Induced by Pyridine and Imidazole in Blakeslea 
trispora.

Liu Y(1)(2)(3), Li XY(3), Lu SH(3), Yu C(3), Zhang YZ(1)(2), Wang ZM(3), Yao 
JM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Biotechnology Center, Institute of Plasma Physics, and Hefei Institutes of 
Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, China.
(2)University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China.
(3)CABIO Biotech (Wuhan) Co. Ltd., Wuhan, China.

Lycopene cyclase needs to be inhibited by the blockers like pyridine or 
imidazole in the lycopene accumulation of Blakeslea trispora. This work 
investigated how pyridine and imidazole impacted the basal metabolism of B. 
trispora, the results helped us understand how they could affect the lycopene 
production and application, and see the metabolic risks from different 
inhibitors. In this study, the highest yield of lycopene with pyridine was 
obtained at 176 mg/L without amino acids supplement, and got more lycopene at 
237 mg/L adding tyrosine, lysine, proline all together as 0.01 mol/L each in 
fermented broth. GC-MS and Principal Component Analysis (PCA) were used to find 
that amino acids, fatty acids, organic acids including phosphoric acid, carbon 
source and imidazole derivatives played the most important roles in lycopene 
fermentation with imidazole, differently, fatty acids, carbon source, and 
pyridine derivatives were more significant in the pyridine process and it was 
remarkable that the residual of both blockers' derivatives would bring the 
potential risks on applications of lycopene products. Predominantly, durene met 
0.35 mg/g DCW with imidazole and piperidine formaldehyde attained 0.24 mg/g DCW 
with pyridine after the end of lycopene fermentations.

Copyright © 2019 Liu, Li, Lu, Yu, Zhang, Wang and Yao.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2019.00347
PMCID: PMC6886401
PMID: 31824936


249. Biomolecules. 2019 Dec 13;9(12):874. doi: 10.3390/biom9120874.

Expression of a Chromoplast-Specific Lycopene β-Cyclase Gene (CYC-B) Is 
Implicated in Carotenoid Accumulation and Coloration in the Loquat.

Hong M(1), Chi ZH(2), Wang YQ(2), Tang YM(3), Deng QX(2), He MY(1), Wang RK(1), 
He YZ(1).

Author information:
(1)Citrus Research Institute, Southwest University/Chinese Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Chongqing 400712, China.
(2)College of Horticulture, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu 611130, 
China.
(3)Institute of Agro-products Processing Science and Technology, Sichuan Academy 
of Agricultural Sciences, Chengdu 610066, China.

Carotenoids are the principal pigments in the loquat. Although the metabolic 
pathway of plant carotenoids has been extensively investigated, few studies have 
been explored the regulatory mechanisms of loquat carotenoids because knowledge 
of the loquat genome is incomplete. The chromoplast-specific lycopene β-cyclase 
gene (CYC-B) could catalyze cyclization of lycopene to β-carotene. In this 
study, the differential accumulation patterns of loquat with different colors 
were analyzed and virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) was utilized in order to 
verify CYC-B gene function. Using a cloning strategy of homologous genes, a 
CYC-B gene orthologue was successfully identified from the loquat. At a later 
stage of maturation, CYC-B gene expression and carotenoids concentrations in the 
'Dawuxing' variety were higher than in 'Chuannong 1-5-9', possibly leading to 
the difference in pulp coloration of loquat. Interference of CYC-B gene 
expression in the loquat demonstrated clear visual changes. The green color in 
negative control fruits became yellow, while TRV2-CYC-B silenced fruits remained 
green. CYC-B gene expression and total carotenoid content in the pulp decreased 
by 32.5% and 44.1%, respectively. Furthermore, multiple key genes in the 
carotenoid metabolic pathway synergistically responded to downregulation of 
CYC-B gene expression. In summary, we provide direct evidences that CYC-B gene 
is involved in carotenoid accumulation and coloration in the loquat.

DOI: 10.3390/biom9120874
PMCID: PMC6995616
PMID: 31847172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


250. J Agric Food Chem. 2020 Feb 5;68(5):1286-1296. doi:
10.1021/acs.jafc.9b07134.  Epub 2020 Jan 24.

Banana MaSPL16 Modulates Carotenoid Biosynthesis during Fruit Ripening through 
Activating the Transcription of Lycopene β-Cyclase Genes.

Zhu LS(1), Liang SM(1), Chen LL(1), Wu CJ(1), Wei W(1), Shan W(1), Chen JY(1), 
Lu WJ(1), Su XG(2), Kuang JF(1).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Postharvest Science of Fruits and 
Vegetables/Engineering Research Center of Southern Horticultural Products 
Preservation, Ministry of Education, College of Horticulture , South China 
Agricultural University , Guangzhou 510642 , P. R. China.
(2)Guangdong Food and Drug Vocational College , Longdongbei Road 321 , Tianhe 
District, Guangzhou 510520 , P. R. China.

Carotenoids are a class of bioactive compounds that exhibit health-promoting 
properties for humans, but their regulation in bananas during fruit ripening 
remains largely unclear. Here, we found that the total carotenoid content 
continued to be elevated along the course of banana ripening and peaked at the 
ripening stage followed by a decrease, which is presumably caused by the 
transcript abundances of carotenoid biosynthetic genes MaLCYB1.1 and MaLCYB1.2. 
Moreover, a ripening-inducible transcription factor MaSPL16 was characterized, 
which was a nuclear protein with transactivation activity. Transient 
transformation of MaSPL16 in banana fruits led to enhanced transcript levels of 
MaLCYB1.1 and MaLCYB1.2 and hence the total carotenoid accumulation. 
Importantly, MaSPL16 stimulated the transcription of MaLCYB1.1 and MaLCYB1.2 
through directly binding to their promoters. Collectively, our findings indicate 
that MaSPL16 behaves as an activator to modulate banana carotenoid biosynthesis, 
which may provide a new target for molecular improvement of the nutritional and 
bioactive qualities of agricultural crops that accumulate carotenoids.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jafc.9b07134
PMID: 31891496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Agric Food Chem. 2020 Feb 5;68(5):1354-1363. doi:
10.1021/acs.jafc.9b06918.  Epub 2020 Jan 27.

Functional Characterization of Lycopene Cyclases Illustrates the Metabolic 
Pathway toward Lutein in Red Algal Seaweeds.

Deng YY(1)(2), Cheng L(1), Wang Q(1), Ge ZH(1), Zheng H(1), Cao TJ(1), Lu QQ(2), 
Yang LE(1)(2), Lu S(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences 
, Nanjing University , Nanjing 210023 , China.
(2)Jiangsu Marine Fisheries Research Institute , Nantong 226007 , China.

Carotenoids are essential phytonutrients synthesized by all photosynthetic 
organisms. Acyclic lycopene is the first branching point for carotenoid 
biosynthesis. Lycopene β- and ε-cyclases (LCYB and LCYE, respectively) catalyze 
the cyclization of its open ends and direct the metabolic flux into different 
downstream branches. Carotenoids of the β,β-branch (e.g., β-carotene) are found 
in all photosynthetic organisms, but those of the β,ε-branch (e.g., lutein) are 
generally absent in cyanobacteria, heterokonts, and some red algae. Although 
both LCYBs and LCYEs have been characterized from land plants, there are only a 
few reports on LCYs from cyanobacteria and algae. Here, we cloned four LCY genes 
from Porphyra umbilicalis and Pyropia yezoensis (susabi-nori) of Bangiales, the 
most primitive red algal order that synthesizes lutein. Our functional 
characterization in both Escherichia coli and Arabidopsis thaliana demonstrated 
that each species has a pair of LCYB and LCYE. Similar to LCYs from higher 
plants, red algal LCYBs cyclize both ends of lycopene, and their LCYEs only 
cyclize a single end. The characterization of LCYEs from red algae resolved the 
first bifurcation step toward β-carotene and lutein biosynthesis. Our 
phylogenetic analysis suggests that LCYEs of the green lineage and the red algae 
originated separately during evolution.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jafc.9b06918
PMID: 31933364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Metab Eng. 2020 May;59:76-86. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2020.01.008. Epub 2020
Jan  30.

CRISPR/Cas9 directed editing of lycopene epsilon-cyclase modulates metabolic 
flux for β-carotene biosynthesis in banana fruit.

Kaur N(1), Alok A(2), Shivani(1), Kumar P(2), Kaur N(2), Awasthi P(2), 
Chaturvedi S(1), Pandey P(2), Pandey A(2), Pandey AK(2), Tiwari S(3).

Author information:
(1)National Agri-Food Biotechnology Institute (NABI), Department of 
Biotechnology, Ministry of Science and Technology (Government of India), Sector 
81, Knowledge City, S.A.S. Nagar, Mohali, 140306, Punjab, India; Department of 
Biotechnology, Panjab University, Chandigarh, 160014, India.
(2)National Agri-Food Biotechnology Institute (NABI), Department of 
Biotechnology, Ministry of Science and Technology (Government of India), Sector 
81, Knowledge City, S.A.S. Nagar, Mohali, 140306, Punjab, India.
(3)National Agri-Food Biotechnology Institute (NABI), Department of 
Biotechnology, Ministry of Science and Technology (Government of India), Sector 
81, Knowledge City, S.A.S. Nagar, Mohali, 140306, Punjab, India. Electronic 
address: siddharthdna20@yahoo.com.

Banana is one of the most economically important fruit crops worldwide. Genetic 
improvement in banana is a challenging task due to its parthenocarpic nature and 
triploid genome. Genetic modification of crops via the CRISPR/Cas9 module has 
emerged as a promising tool to develop important traits. In the present work, a 
CRISPR/Cas9-based approach was used to develop the β-carotene-enriched Cavendish 
banana cultivar (cv.) Grand Naine (AAA genome). The fifth exon of the lycopene 
epsilon-cyclase (LCYε) gene was targeted. The targeting specificity of the 
designed guide-RNA was also tested by its ability to create indels in the LCYε 
gene at the A genome of cv. Rasthali (AAB genome). Sequence analysis revealed 
multiple types of indels in the genomic region of Grand Naine LCYε (GN-LCYε). 
Metabolic profiling of the fruit pulp of selected edited lines showed enhanced 
accumulation of β-carotene content up to 6-fold (~24 μg/g) compared with the 
unedited plants. These lines also showed either an absence or a drastic 
reduction in the levels of lutein and α-carotene, suggesting metabolic 
reprogramming, without any significant effect on the agro-morphological 
parameters. In addition, differential expression of carotenoid pathway genes was 
observed in the edited lines in comparison to unedited plants. Overall, this is 
the first report in banana to improve nutritional trait by using a precise 
genome editing approach.

Copyright © 2020 International Metabolic Engineering Society. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymben.2020.01.008
PMID: 32006663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare there are no conflicts of interest.


253. Microb Cell Fact. 2020 Feb 18;19(1):38. doi: 10.1186/s12934-020-01305-4.

Engineering yeast artificial core promoter with designated base motifs.

Liu R(1)(2), Liu L(1)(2), Li X(1)(2), Liu D(3)(4), Yuan Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Frontier Science Center for Synthetic Biology and Key Laboratory of Systems 
Bioengineering (Ministry of Education), School of Chemical Engineering and 
Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300350, People's Republic of China.
(2)SynBio Research Platform, Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science 
and Engineering (Tianjin), Tianjin, 300072, People's Republic of China.
(3)Frontier Science Center for Synthetic Biology and Key Laboratory of Systems 
Bioengineering (Ministry of Education), School of Chemical Engineering and 
Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300350, People's Republic of China. 
liuduo19870401@126.com.
(4)SynBio Research Platform, Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science 
and Engineering (Tianjin), Tianjin, 300072, People's Republic of China. 
liuduo19870401@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Synthetic biology requires toolbox of promoters to finely tune gene 
expression levels for building up efficient cell factories. Yeast promoters 
owned variable core promoter regions between the TATA-box and transcriptional 
starting site (TSS) at the length mostly around 20-80 bases. This region allowed 
flexible design of artificial promoter but potentially demand special base 
motifs to maintain or enhance the promoter's strength.
RESULTS: Here, we designed and screened the base motifs and tested the 
activities of yeast artificial core promoters. Different 30 bases of artificial 
sequences led to variable expression levels of CrtY enzyme which determined the 
lycopene-carotene compositions, represented in the colony-color spectrum of 
red-orange-yellow. The upstream sequences of two strong promoter PEXP1 and PGPD 
and two starting strains with distinguishable lycopene production levels were 
utilized to characterize the promoter sequences. Different partition designs of 
T-rich or G/C-rich base motifs led to distinguishable colony-color 
distributions. Finally, we screened a champion promoter with a highest 5.5-fold 
enhancement of lycopene-carotene transformation. Another selected promoter 
generated a highest beta-carotene production as 7.4 mg/g DCW.
CONCLUSIONS: This work offered an approach to redesign promoter with artificial 
sequences. We concluded that the core promoter region could be designated as 30 
bases and different base motifs would enhance or weaken the promoter's strength. 
Generally, more T-rich elements, higher %T and lower G/C percentage were 
beneficial to enhance the strength of artificial core promoter.

DOI: 10.1186/s12934-020-01305-4
PMCID: PMC7026997
PMID: 32070349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


254. Biotechnol Lett. 2020 Jun;42(6):945-956. doi: 10.1007/s10529-020-02844-x.
Epub  2020 Feb 24.

Metabolic engineering of β-carotene biosynthesis in Yarrowia lipolytica.

Zhang XK(1), Wang DN(1), Chen J(1), Liu ZJ(2), Wei LJ(1), Hua Q(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioreactor Engineering, East China University of 
Science and Technology, 130 Meilong Road, Shanghai, 200237, People's Republic of 
China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Fermentation Engineering (Ministry of Education), Hubei Key 
Laboratory of Industrial Microbiology, Hubei Collaborative Innovation Center of 
Industrial Fermentation, Hubei University of Technology, Wuhan, 430068, People's 
Republic of China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Bioreactor Engineering, East China University of 
Science and Technology, 130 Meilong Road, Shanghai, 200237, People's Republic of 
China. qhua@ecust.edu.cn.
(4)Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center for Biomanufacturing Technology, 130 
Meilong Road, Shanghai, 200237, People's Republic of China. qhua@ecust.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: Carotenoids, as potent antioxidant compounds, have gained extensive 
attention, especially in human health. In this study, the combination of 
CRISPR/Cas9 integration strategy and fermenter cultivation was utilized to 
obtain efficient β-carotene-producing Yarrowia lipolytica cell factories for 
potential industrial application.
RESULTS: The introduction of the genes of Mucor circinelloides, encoding 
phytoene dehydrogenase (carB) and bifunctional phytoene synthase/lycopene 
cyclase (carRP), contributed to the heterologous production of β-carotene in Y. 
lipolytica XK2. Furthermore, β-carotene production was efficiently enhanced by 
increasing the copy numbers of the carB and carRP genes and overexpressing of 
GGS1, ERG13, and HMG, the genes related to the mevalonate (MVA) pathway. Thus, 
the optimized strain overexpressed a total of eight genes, including three 
copies of carRP, two copies of carB, and single copies of GGS1, HMG, and ERG13. 
As a consequence, strain Y. lipolytica XK19 accumulated approximately 408 mg/L 
β-carotene in shake flask cultures, a twenty-four-fold increase compared to the 
parental strain Y. lipolytica XK2.
CONCLUSIONS: 4.5 g/L β-carotene was obtained in a 5-L fermenter through a 
combination of genetic engineering and culture optimization, suggesting a great 
capacity and flexibility of Y. lipolytica in the production of carotenoids.

DOI: 10.1007/s10529-020-02844-x
PMID: 32090297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Zhejiang Univ Sci B. 2020 Feb.;21(2):172-177. doi: 10.1631/jzus.B1900459.
Epub  2020 Feb 5.

Analysis of nicotine-induced metabolic changes in Blakeslea trispora by GC-MS.

Liu Y(1)(2), Shao YR(3), Li XY(1)(2)(4), Wang ZM(4), Yang LR(3), Zhang YZ(1)(2), 
Wu MB(3)(5), Yao JM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Biotechnology Center, Institute of Plasma Physics and Hefei Institutes of 
Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei 230031, China.
(2)University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Biomass Chemical Engineering of Ministry of Education, 
College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 
310027, China.
(4)CABIO Bioengineering (Wuhan) Co. Ltd., Wuhan 436070, China.
(5)Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Antifungal Drugs, Taizhou 318000, China.

Blakeslea trispora is a natural source of carotenoids, including β-carotene and 
lycopene, which have industrial applications. Therefore, classical selective 
breeding techniques have been applied to generate strains with increased 
productivity, and microencapsulated β-carotene preparation has been used in food 
industry (Li et al., 2019). In B. trispora, lycopene is synthesized via the 
mevalonate pathway (Venkateshwaran et al., 2015). Lycopene cyclase, which is one 
of the key enzymes in this pathway, is a bifunctional enzyme that can catalyze 
the cyclization of lycopene to produce β-carotene and exhibit phytoene synthase 
activity (He et al., 2017).

DOI: 10.1631/jzus.B1900459
PMCID: PMC7076348
PMID: 32115914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Compliance with ethics guidelines: Yang LIU, 
You-ran SHAO, Xiang-yu LI, Zhi-ming WANG, Li-rong YANG, Yu-zhou ZHANG, Mian-bin 
WU, and Jian-ming YAO declare that they have no conflict of interest. This 
article does not contain any studies with human or animal subjects performed by 
any of the authors.


256. Aquat Toxicol. 2020 May;222:105472. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2020.105472. Epub
 2020 Mar 12.

Transcription activation of β-carotene biosynthetic genes at the initial stage 
of stresses as an indicator of the increased β-carotene accumulation in isolated 
Dunaliella salina strain GY-H13.

Zhu QL(1), Zheng JL(2), Liu J(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Marine Biology & Pharmacology, Ocean College, Zhejiang 
University, 1 Zheda Road, Dinghai District, Zhoushan, 316000, Zhejiang, PR 
China; College of Marine Ocean Science and Technology, Zhejiang Ocean 
University, Zhoushan, 316022, PR China.
(2)National Engineering Research Center of Marine Facilities Aquaculture, 
Zhejiang Ocean University, Zhoushan, 316022, PR China. Electronic address: 
zhengjialang@aliyun.com.
(3)Institute of Marine Biology & Pharmacology, Ocean College, Zhejiang 
University, 1 Zheda Road, Dinghai District, Zhoushan, 316000, Zhejiang, PR 
China; College of Marine Ocean Science and Technology, Zhejiang Ocean 
University, Zhoushan, 316022, PR China. Electronic address: 
liujh2013@zju.edu.cn.

β-carotene is an efficient antioxidant and its accumulation is an oxidative 
response to stressors. Dunaliella salina strain GY-H13 is rich in β-carotene 
under environmental stresses, which was selected as material to understand the 
molecular mechanism underlying β-carotene biosynthesis. Seven full length cDNA 
sequences in β-carotene biosynthesis pathway were cloned, including 
geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthase (GGPS), phytoene synthase (PSY), phytoene 
desaturase (PDS), 15-cis-zeta-carotene isomerase (ZISO), zeta-carotene 
desaturase (ZDS), prolycopene isomerase (CRTISO), lycopene beta-cyclase (LCYb). 
The seven protein sequences from the strain GY-H13 showed the highest similarity 
with other D. salina strains. Especially, PSY, PDS and LCYb protein sequences 
shared 100 % identity. Phylogenetic analysis indicated all proteins from GY-H13 
firstly clustered with those from other D. salina strains with a bootstrap of 
100 %. Multiple alignment indicated several distinct conserved motifs such as 
aspartate-rich domain (ARD), dinucleotide binding domain (DBD), and carotene 
binding domain (CBD). These motifs are located near ligand-binding pocket, which 
may be required for the activity of enzyme. Expression levels of these genes and 
β-carotene content were measured over 24-h cycle, showing clear daily dynamics. 
All genes were dramatically up-regulated in the morning but the highest 
accumulation of β-carotene was observed at noon, suggesting a lag-effect between 
gene transcription and biological response. Furthermore, the accumulation of 
β-carotene increased under nitrogen deficiency, Cd exposure and high light and 
decreased under high salinity in a time-dependent manner. No gene of β-carotene 
biosynthesis was up-regulated by high salinity while most genes were activated 
by the other stresses at the beginning stage of exposure. Growth inhibition and 
oxidative damage were also observed under high salinity. Overall, transcription 
activation of β-carotene biosynthetic genes at the initial stage of stress 
exposure is a determinant of the increased accumulation of β-carotene in 
microalgae, which help their survive under harsh environments. The newly 
isolated D. salina strain GY-H13 would be a promising microalgae model for 
investigating the molecular mechanism of stress-induced β-carotene biosynthesis.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2020.105472
PMID: 32203794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declared that they have no conflicts of interest to this work.


257. J Gen Appl Microbiol. 2020 Jun 17;66(2):53-58. doi:
10.2323/jgam.2020.01.005.  Epub 2020 Mar 28.

Carotenogenesis in cyanobacteria: CruA/CruP-type and CrtL-type lycopene 
cyclases.

Sugiyama K(1), Takaichi S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, School of Advanced Engineering, Kogakuin 
University.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Faculty of Life Science, Tokyo 
University of Agriculture.

Cyanobacteria are oxygenic photoautotrophic prokaryotes containing chlorophylls 
and carotenoids, and the latter play important roles in light-harvesting, 
protection of excess light, assembly of pigment-protein complexes, and 
stabilization of lipid membranes. Cyanobacteria produce many kinds of 
carotenoids, such as β-carotene, zeaxanthin, echinenone, and myxol glycosides, 
which have a cyclic structure at one or both end(s). Cyclization of lycopene is 
a branch point in carotenoid biosynthesis to β-carotene and γ-carotene. Two 
types of lycopene cyclases, CruA/CruP-type and CrtL-type, are functionally 
confirmed in only five species, while homologous genes are found in the genomes 
of most cyanobacteria. This review summarizes the carotenogenesis pathways and 
the functional enzymes along with genes, focusing particularly on the 
cyclization of lycopene by distinct types of lycopene cyclases in cyanobacteria.

DOI: 10.2323/jgam.2020.01.005
PMID: 32224594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Agric Food Chem. 2020 May 6;68(18):5147-5153. doi:
10.1021/acs.jafc.0c01024.  Epub 2020 Apr 21.

High-Yield Production of Lycopene from Corn Steep Liquor and Glycerol Using the 
Metabolically Engineered Deinococcus radiodurans R1 Strain.

Kang CK(1), Jeong SW(1), Yang JE(2), Choi YJ(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Environmental Engineering, University of Seoul, Seoul 02504, 
Republic of Korea.
(2)World Institute of Kimchi, Gwangju 61755, Republic of Korea.

Developing a highly efficient and ecofriendly system to produce desired products 
from waste can be considered important to a sustainable society. Here, we report 
for the first time high-yield production of lycopene through metabolically 
engineering an extremophilic microorganism, Deinococcus radiodurans R1, from 
corn steep liquor (CSL) and glycerol. First, the crtLm gene-encoding lycopene 
cyclase was deleted to prevent the conversion of lycopene to γ-carotene. Then, 
the crtB gene-encoding phytoene synthase and the dxs gene-encoding 
1-deoxy-d-xylulose 5-phosphate synthase were overexpressed to increase carbon 
flux toward lycopene. The engineered ΔcrtLm/crtB+dxs+ D. radiodurans R1 could 
produce 273.8 mg/L [80.7 mg/g dry cell weight (DCW)] and 373.5 mg/L (108.0 mg/g 
DCW) of lycopene from 10 g/L of glucose with 5 g/L of yeast extract and 9.9 g/L 
of glucose with 20 g/L of CSL, respectively. Moreover, the lycopene titer and 
content were increased by 26% (470.6 mg/L) and 28% (138.2 mg/g DCW), 
respectively, when the carbon source was changed to glycerol. Finally, fed-batch 
fermentation of the final engineered strain allowed the production of 722.2 mg/L 
(203.5 mg/g DCW) of lycopene with a yield and productivity of 20.3 mg/g glycerol 
and 6.0 mg/L/h, respectively, from 25 g/L of CSL and 35.7 g/L of glycerol.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jafc.0c01024
PMID: 32275417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Plant Physiol. 2020 Jul;183(3):1171-1183. doi: 10.1104/pp.19.01409. Epub
2020  Apr 22.

Decreased Protein Abundance of Lycopene β-Cyclase Contributes to Red Flesh in 
Domesticated Watermelon.

Zhang J(1), Sun H(1), Guo S(1), Ren Y(1), Li M(1), Wang J(1), Zhang H(1), Gong 
G(1), Xu Y(2).

Author information:
(1)National Watermelon and Melon Improvement Center, Beijing Academy of 
Agricultural and Forestry Sciences, Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic 
Improvement of Horticultural Crops (North China), Beijing Key Laboratory of 
Vegetable Germplasm Improvement, Beijing 100097, China.
(2)National Watermelon and Melon Improvement Center, Beijing Academy of 
Agricultural and Forestry Sciences, Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic 
Improvement of Horticultural Crops (North China), Beijing Key Laboratory of 
Vegetable Germplasm Improvement, Beijing 100097, China xuyong@nercv.org.

Red-fleshed watermelons (Citrullus lanatus) that accumulate lycopene in their 
flesh cells have been selected and domesticated from their pale-fleshed 
ancestors. However, the molecular basis of this trait remains poorly understood. 
Using map-based cloning and transgenic analysis, we identified a lycopene 
β-cyclase (ClLCYB) gene that controls the flesh color of watermelon. 
Down-regulation of ClLCYB caused the flesh color to change from pale yellow to 
red, and ClLCYB overexpression in the red-fleshed line caused the flesh color to 
change to orange. Analysis of ClLCYB single-nucleotide polymorphisms using 211 
watermelon accessions with different flesh colors revealed that two missense 
mutations between three haplotypes (ClLCYB red , ClLCYB white , and ClLCYB 
yellow ) were selected and largely fixed in domesticated watermelon. Proteins 
derived from these three ClLCYB haplotypes were localized in plastids to 
catalyze the conversion of lycopene to β-carotene and showed similar catalytic 
abilities. We revealed that ClLCYB protein abundance, instead of ClLCYB 
transcript level, was negatively correlated with lycopene accumulation. 
Different amounts of ClLCYB protein degradation among the ClLCYB haplotypes were 
found in ClLCYB transgenic Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) lines. After 
treatment with the proteasome inhibitor MG132, the concentration of ClLCYBred 
increased noticeably compared with other ClLCYB proteins. These results indicate 
that natural missense mutations within ClLCYB influence ClLCYB protein abundance 
and have contributed to the development of red flesh color in domesticated 
watermelon.

© 2020 American Society of Plant Biologists. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.19.01409
PMCID: PMC7333704
PMID: 32321841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Hortic Res. 2020 May 1;7:70. doi: 10.1038/s41438-020-0287-3. eCollection
2020.

Transcriptome analysis and metabolic profiling reveal the key role of 
carotenoids in the petal coloration of Liriodendron tulipifera.

Hao Z(1), Liu S(1), Hu L(1), Shi J(1), Chen J(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Forest Genetics and Biotechnology of Ministry of Education, 
Co-Innovation Center for Sustainable Forestry in Southern China, Nanjing 
Forestry University, Nanjing, Jiangsu China.

Liriodendron tulipifera, also known as tuliptree, is a popular ornamental 
horticultural plant with extraordinary tulip-shaped flowers characterized by an 
orange band near their base. The mechanisms underlying petal band-specific 
pigmentation during L. tulipifera flower development are unclear. Here, we 
combined nontargeted and targeted metabolomics and transcriptomics to identify a 
pathway cascade leading to carotenoid biosynthesis that is specifically 
activated in the petal band. The comparative analysis of carotenoid metabolites 
between L. tulipifera and Liriodendron hybrids indicates that γ-carotene, a rare 
carotene in plants, is the most likely orange pigment responsible for the 
coloration of the petal band. Phenotypic and transcriptomic analyses of 
developing petals reveal that the band area is first predefined by the loss of 
green color. Later, the band is maintained by locally activating and repressing 
carotenoid and chlorophyll biosynthesis genes, respectively. Two rate-limiting 
genes of carotene biosynthesis, carotenoid isomerase (CRTISO) and epsilon 
lycopene cyclase (ε-LCY), encode the core enzymes responsible for petal 
band-specific orange pigmentation in L. tulipifera. In particular, a putative 
additional ε-LCY copy specific to L. tulipifera may contribute to the distinct 
petal coloration pattern, compared with L. chinense. Taken together, our work 
provides a first glimpse of the metabolome and transcriptome dynamics in 
tuliptree flower coloration and provides a valuable resource for flower breeding 
or metabolic engineering as well as for understanding flower evolution in an 
early woody angiosperm.

© The Author(s) 2020.

DOI: 10.1038/s41438-020-0287-3
PMCID: PMC7193617
PMID: 32377360

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.


261. J Agric Food Chem. 2020 Oct 14;68(41):11503-11511. doi: 
10.1021/acs.jafc.0c03092. Epub 2020 Sep 30.

Functional Validation of Phytoene Synthase and Lycopene ε-Cyclase Genes for High 
Lycopene Content in Autumn Olive Fruit (Elaeagnus umbellata).

Wang T(1), Hou Y(1), Hu H(1), Wang C(1), Zhang W(1), Li H(1), Cheng Z(1), Yang 
L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Biotechnology on Specialty Economic 
Plants, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua 321004, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Department of Environmental Engineering, Quzhou University, Quzhou 324000, 
Zhejiang, China.

Lycopene is the most potent antioxidant among all carotenoids and is beneficial 
to human health. A ripe fruit of autumn olive (Elaeagnus umbellata Thunb.) 
accumulates a high level of lycopene, which is 5-20 times higher than that in an 
ordinary tomato fruit. During fruit ripening of autumn olive, only phytoene 
synthase (EutPSY) expression pattern shows a tight positive correlation with the 
increased lycopene content observed at four ripening stages, while the lycopene 
ε-cyclase (EutLCYe) transcript could not be detected throughout fruit ripening. 
Here, we investigated whether the two genes are important targets for 
engineering lycopene biosynthesis. The full-length cDNAs of EutPSY and EutLCYe 
were first isolated. Fruit-specific overexpression of EutPSY in tomato fruits 
resulted in elevated contents of lycopene and β-carotene through feedforward 
regulation of carotenogenic genes, i.e., downregulation of SlLCYe and 
upregulation of SlLCYb and SlCYCB. These fruits were decreased in ethylene 
production throughout ripening. Transcript levels of genes for system-2 ethylene 
synthesis (SlACS2, SlACS4, SlACO1, and SlACO3), perception (SlNR/ETR3 and 
SlETR4), and response (SlE4 and SlE8) were also inhibited in 
EutPSY-overexpressing fruits. Repressing ethylene synthesis and signaling 
transduction delayed fruit climacteric ripening of transgenic tomato plants. 
Additionally, RNAi suppression of SlLCYe enhanced β-carotene but not lycopene 
accumulation through altered expression of carotenogenic genes in transgenic 
tomato fruits by both feedforward and feedback regulatory mechanisms. Ethylene 
production in SlLCYe-RNAi fruits decreased, thereby delaying fruit ripening. 
Collectively, these results confirmed that transcriptional regulation of EutPSY 
and EutLCYe plays a crucial role and a part in massive lycopene accumulation in 
autumn olive fruits, respectively. EutPSY overexpression enhanced lycopene 
accumulation in tomato fruits independently of the ethylene pathway but did not 
influence the size and weight of tomato fruits. EutPSY can be used as an 
effective strategy capable of elevating the lycopene content in fruits for 
improving quality.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jafc.0c03092
PMID: 32936623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Agric Food Chem. 2020 Oct 28;68(43):12048-12057. doi: 
10.1021/acs.jafc.0c04740. Epub 2020 Oct 19.

Building the Synthetic Biology Toolbox with Enzyme Variants to Expand 
Opportunities for Biofortification of Provitamin A and Other Health-Promoting 
Carotenoids.

Zhu K(1)(2), Zheng X(1), Ye J(1), Jiang Q(1), Chen H(1), Mei X(1), Wurtzel 
ET(2)(3), Deng X(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Biology of MOE (Ministry of Education), 
Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei 430070, China.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Lehman College, The City University of New 
York, 250 Bedford Park Boulevard West, Bronx, New York 10468, United States.
(3)The Graduate Center, The City University of New York, 365 Fifth Avenue, New 
York, New York 10016-4309, United States.

Carotenoids are a large class of structures that are important in human health 
and include both provitamin A and nonprovitamin A compounds. Vitamin A 
deficiency is a global health problem that can be alleviated by enriching 
provitamin A carotenoids in a range of food crops. Suitable plants for 
biofortification are those with high levels of the provitamin A biosynthetic 
precursor, lycopene, which is enzymatically converted by lycopene β-cyclase 
(LCYB) to β-carotene, a provitamin A carotenoid. Crops, such as citrus, 
naturally accumulate high levels of provitamin A and other health-promoting 
carotenoids. Such plants may have useful genes to expand the synthetic biology 
toolbox for producing a range of phenotypes, including both high provitamin A 
crops and crops with unique compositions of health-promoting carotenoids. To 
examine enzyme variants having different activity levels, we introduced two 
citrus LCYB alleles into tomato, a plant with fruit rich in lycopene. 
Overexpression in tomato of the stronger allele of the citrus 
chromoplast-specific lycopene β-cyclase (CsLCYb2a) produced "golden" transgenic 
tomato fruits with 9.3-fold increased levels of β-carotene at up to 1.5 mg/g dry 
weight. The use of the weaker allele, CsLCYb2b, also led to enhanced levels of 
β-carotene but in the context of a more heterogeneous composition of 
carotenoids. From a synthetic biology standpoint, these allelic differences have 
value for producing cultivars with unique carotenoid profiles. Overexpression of 
the citrus LCYB genes was accompanied by increased expression of other genes 
encoding carotenoid biosynthetic enzymes and increased size and number of 
chromoplasts needed to sequester the elevated levels of carotenoids in the 
transgenic tomato fruits. The overexpression of the citrus LCYB genes also led 
to a pleiotropic effect on profiles of phytohormones and primary metabolites. 
Our findings show that enzyme variants are essential synthetic biology parts 
needed to create a wider range of metabolic engineering products. In this case, 
strong and weak variants of LCYB proved useful in creating dietary sources to 
alleviate vitamin A deficiency or, alternatively, to create crops with a 
heterogeneous composition including provitamin A and healthful, nonprovitamin A 
carotenoids.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jafc.0c04740
PMID: 33073979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Agric Food Chem. 2020 Oct 28;68(43):11895-11907. doi: 
10.1021/acs.jafc.0c04814. Epub 2020 Oct 19.

Biotechnological Advances in Lycopene β-Cyclases.

Zhao Z(1), Liu Z(1), Mao X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Food Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 
266003, China.
(2)Laboratory for Marine Drugs and Bioproducts of Qingdao National Laboratory 
for Marine Science and Technology, Qingdao 266237, China.

Lycopene β-cyclase is one of the key enzymes in the biosynthesis of carotenoids, 
which catalyzes the β-cyclization of both ends of lycopene to produce 
β-carotene. Lycopene β-cyclases are found in a wide range of sources, mainly 
plants and microorganisms. Lycopene β-cyclases have been extensively studied for 
their important catalytic activity, including for use in genetic engineering to 
modify plants and microorganisms, as a blocking target for lycopene industrial 
production strains, and for their genetic and physiological effects related to 
microorganic and plant biological traits. This review of lycopene β-cyclases 
summarizes the major studies on their basic classification, functional activity, 
metabolic engineering, and plant science.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jafc.0c04814
PMID: 33073992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Genes (Basel). 2020 Oct 30;11(11):1294. doi: 10.3390/genes11111294.

Transcriptional Analysis of Carotenoids Accumulation and Metabolism in a 
Pink-Fleshed Lemon Mutant.

Lana G(1), Zacarias-Garcia J(2), Distefano G(1), Gentile A(1), Rodrigo MJ(2), 
Zacarias L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Agriculture, Food and Environment, University of Catania, 95123 
Catania, Italy.
(2)Food Biotechnology Department, Instituto de Agroquímica y Tecnología de 
Alimentos, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (IATA-CSIC), Paterna, 
46980 Valencia, Spain.

Pink lemon is a spontaneous bud mutation of lemon (Citrus limon, L. Burm. f) 
characterized by the production of pink-fleshed fruits due to an unusual 
accumulation of lycopene. To elucidate the genetic determinism of the altered 
pigmentation, comparative carotenoid profiling and transcriptional analysis of 
both the genes involved in carotenoid precursors and metabolism, and the 
proteins related to carotenoid-sequestering structures were performed in 
pink-fleshed lemon and its wild-type. The carotenoid profile of pink lemon pulp 
is characterized by an increased accumulation of linear carotenoids, such as 
lycopene, phytoene and phytofluene, from the early stages of development, 
reaching their maximum in mature green fruits. The distinctive phenotype of pink 
lemon is associated with an up-regulation and down-regulation of the genes 
upstream and downstream the lycopene cyclase, respectively. In particular, 9-cis 
epoxycarotenoid dioxygenase genes were overexpressed in pink lemon compared with 
the wild-type, suggesting an altered regulation of abscisic acid biosynthesis. 
Similarly, during early development of the fruits, genes of the 
carotenoid-associated proteins heat shock protein 21, fibrillin 1 and 2 and 
orange gene were overexpressed in the pulp of the pink-fleshed lemon compared to 
the wild-type, indicating its increased capacity for sequestration, 
stabilization or accumulation of carotenes. Altogether, the results highlighted 
significant differences at the transcriptomic level between the pink-fleshed 
lemon and its wild-type, in terms of carotenoid metabolism and the capacity of 
stabilization in storage structures between the two accessions. Such changes may 
be either responsible for the altered carotenoid accumulation or in contrast, a 
metabolic consequence.

DOI: 10.3390/genes11111294
PMCID: PMC7692314
PMID: 33143225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.


265. Plant Physiol Biochem. 2020 Dec;157:339-347. doi:
10.1016/j.plaphy.2020.10.036.  Epub 2020 Nov 4.

The gene encoding lycopene epsilon cyclase of celery enhanced lutein and 
β-carotene contents and confers increased salt tolerance in Arabidopsis.

Yin L(1), Liu JX(1), Tao JP(1), Xing GM(2), Tan GF(3), Li S(2), Duan AQ(1), Ding 
X(1), Xu ZS(1), Xiong AS(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Rural Affairs Key Laboratory of Biology and Germplasm 
Enhancement of Horticultural Crops in East China, College of Horticulture, 
Nanjing Agricultural University, 1 Weigang, Nanjing, 210095, China.
(2)Collaborative Innovation Center for Improving Quality and Increase Profits of 
Protected Vegetables in Shanxi, Shanxi Agricultural University, Taigu, China.
(3)Institute of Horticulture, Guizhou Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Guiyang, 
55006, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Rural Affairs Key Laboratory of Biology and Germplasm 
Enhancement of Horticultural Crops in East China, College of Horticulture, 
Nanjing Agricultural University, 1 Weigang, Nanjing, 210095, China. Electronic 
address: xiongaisheng@njau.edu.cn.

Celery (Apium graveolens L.) is a leafy vegetable of Apiaceae, which is greatly 
popular because of its rich nutrients. Lutein and β-carotene are two important 
carotenoids. Lycopene epsilon cyclase (LCY-ε) is a key branch point enzyme in 
the carotenoid biosynthetic pathway. In this study, we cloned the AgLCY-ε gene 
from celery and overexpressed it in Arabidopsis. The results showed that both 
lutein and β-carotene accumulation increased significantly in transgenic 
Arabidopsis hosting AgLCY-ε gene, compared with wild type (WT) plants. The 
transcription levels of AtPSY and AtCRTISO genes involved in carotenoids 
biosynthesis also increased in transgenic lines. One-month-old transgenic 
Arabidopsis seedlings were treated with 200 mM NaCl. The malondialdehyde (MDA) 
content in transgenic Arabidopsis plants after salt treatment was significantly 
lower, and the activities of the two antioxidant enzymes, superoxide dismutase 
(SOD) and peroxidase (POD), were significantly increased than that of WT plants. 
Overexpression of AgLCY-ε gene showed increased lutein and β-carotene 
accumulations, and enhanced salt tolerance in transgenic plants.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2020.10.036
PMID: 33186851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Microb Cell Fact. 2020 Nov 30;19(1):220. doi: 10.1186/s12934-020-01480-4.

The generation of metabolic changes for the production of high-purity zeaxanthin 
mediated by CRISPR-Cas9 in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.

Song I(1), Kim J(1), Baek K(1), Choi Y(2), Shin B(2), Jin E(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, Research Institute for Natural Sciences, Hanyang 
University, 222, Wangsimni-ro, Seongdong-gu, Seoul, 04763, Republic of Korea.
(2)Arca Eir, C-323, Daedeok Biz Center, 17 Techno4-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 
34013, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Life Science, Research Institute for Natural Sciences, Hanyang 
University, 222, Wangsimni-ro, Seongdong-gu, Seoul, 04763, Republic of Korea. 
esjin@hanyang.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Zeaxanthin, a major xanthophyll pigment, has a significant role as a 
retinal pigment and antioxidant. Because zeaxanthin helps to prevent age-related 
macular degeneration, its commercial use in personalized nutritional and 
pharmaceutical applications has expanded. To meet the quantitative requirements 
for personalized treatment and pharmaceutical applications, it is necessary to 
produce highly purified zeaxanthin.
RESULTS: In this study, to meet the quantitative requirements for industrial 
applications, we generated a double knockout mutant which is gene-edited by the 
CRISPR-Cas9 ribonucleoprotein-mediated knock-in system. The lycopene epsilon 
cyclase (LCYE) was edited to the elimination of α-branch of xanthophyll 
biosynthesis in a knockout mutant of the zeaxanthin epoxidase gene (ZEP). The 
double knockout mutant (dzl) had a 60% higher zeaxanthin yield (5.24 mg L- 1) 
and content (7.28 mg g- 1) than that of the parental line after 3 days of 
cultivation. Furthermore, medium optimization improved the 3-day yield of 
zeaxanthin from the dzl mutant to 6.84 mg L- 1.
CONCLUSIONS: A Chlamydomonas strain with the elimination of lutein production by 
gene editing using CRISPR-Cas9 has been successfully developed. This research 
presents a solution to overcome the difficulties of the downstream-process for 
the production of high-purity zeaxanthin.

DOI: 10.1186/s12934-020-01480-4
PMCID: PMC7708255
PMID: 33256757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


267. Sci Rep. 2020 Dec 3;10(1):21106. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-77876-4.

Multiplicity of carotene patterns derives from competition between phytoene 
desaturase diversification and biological environments.

Fournié M(1)(2)(3), Truan G(4).

Author information:
(1)TBI, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, INRAE, INSA, Toulouse, France.
(2)Adisseo France S.A.S., 10 place du Général de Gaulle, 92160, Anthony, France.
(3)Groupe Avril, 11 Rue de Monceau, 75378, Paris, Cedex 08, France.
(4)TBI, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, INRAE, INSA, Toulouse, France. 
gilles.truan@insa-toulouse.fr.

Phytoene desaturases catalyse from two to six desaturation reactions on 
phytoene, generating a large diversity of molecules that can then be cyclised 
and produce, depending on the organism, many different carotenoids. We 
constructed a phylogenetic tree of a subset of phytoene desaturases from the 
CrtI family for which functional data was available. We expressed in a bacterial 
system eight codon optimized CrtI enzymes from different clades. Analysis of the 
phytoene desaturation reactions on crude extracts showed that three CrtI enzymes 
can catalyse up to six desaturations, forming tetradehydrolycopene. Kinetic data 
generated using a subset of five purified enzymes demonstrate the existence of 
characteristic patterns of desaturated molecules associated with various CrtI 
clades. The kinetic data was also analysed using a classical Michaelis-Menten 
kinetic model, showing that variations in the reaction rates and binding 
constants could explain the various carotene patterns observed. Competition 
between lycopene cyclase and the phytoene desaturases modified the distribution 
between carotene intermediates when expressed in yeast in the context of the 
full β-carotene production pathway. Our results demonstrate that the 
desaturation patterns of carotene molecules in various biological environments 
cannot be fully inferred from phytoene desaturases classification but is 
governed both by evolutionary-linked variations in the desaturation rates and 
competition between desaturation and cyclisation steps.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-77876-4
PMCID: PMC7713294
PMID: 33273560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests. The 
authors declare that this study received funding from Adisseo SA, Avril SCA, and 
ANRT (CIFRE2015/0825 and CIFRE2017/0236). The funder had no role in study 
design, data analysis and preparation of the manuscript.


268. J Exp Bot. 2021 Mar 29;72(7):2544-2569. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erab029.

Lycopene β-cyclase expression influences plant physiology, development, and 
metabolism in tobacco plants.

Kössler S(1), Armarego-Marriott T(1), Tarkowská D(2), Turečková V(2), Agrawal 
S(1), Mi J(3), de Souza LP(1), Schöttler MA(1), Schadach A(1), Fröhlich A(1), 
Bock R(1), Al-Babili S(3), Ruf S(1), Sampathkumar A(1), Moreno JC(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie, Am Mühlenberg1 
D-14476, Potsdam-Golm, Germany.
(2)Laboratory of Growth Regulators, Institute of Experimental Botany, The Czech 
Academy of Sciences and Palacký University, Šlechtitelů, Olomouc, Czech 
Republic.
(3)Center for Desert Agriculture, Biological and Environmental Science and 
Engineering Division (BESE), King Abdullah University of Science and Technology 
(KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia.

Carotenoids are important isoprenoids produced in the plastids of photosynthetic 
organisms that play key roles in photoprotection and antioxidative processes. 
β-Carotene is generated from lycopene by lycopene β-cyclase (LCYB). Previously, 
we demonstrated that the introduction of the Daucus carota (carrot) DcLCYB1 gene 
into tobacco (cv. Xanthi) resulted in increased levels of abscisic acid (ABA) 
and especially gibberellins (GAs), resulting in increased plant yield. In order 
to understand this phenomenon prior to exporting this genetic strategy to crops, 
we generated tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum cv. Petit Havana) mutants that exhibited 
a wide range of LCYB expression. Transplastomic plants expressing DcLCYB1 at 
high levels showed a wild-type-like growth, even though their pigment content 
was increased and their leaf GA1 content was reduced. RNA interference (RNAi) 
NtLCYB lines showed different reductions in NtLCYB transcript abundance, 
correlating with reduced pigment content and plant variegation. Photosynthesis 
(leaf absorptance, Fv/Fm, and light-saturated capacity of linear electron 
transport) and plant growth were impaired. Remarkably, drastic changes in 
phytohormone content also occurred in the RNAi lines. However, external 
application of phytohormones was not sufficient to rescue these phenotypes, 
suggesting that altered photosynthetic efficiency might be another important 
factor explaining their reduced biomass. These results show that LCYB expression 
influences plant biomass by different mechanisms and suggests thresholds for 
LCYB expression levels that might be beneficial or detrimental for plant growth.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erab029
PMCID: PMC8006556
PMID: 33484250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2021 Jun;193(6):1967-1978. doi: 
10.1007/s12010-021-03524-w. Epub 2021 Feb 2.

Enhanced Lutein Production in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii by Overexpression of the 
Lycopene Epsilon Cyclase Gene.

Tokunaga S(1), Morimoto D(2), Koyama T(1), Kubo Y(1), Shiroi M(1), Ohara K(1), 
Higashine T(1), Mori Y(1), Nakagawa S(1), Sawayama S(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto University, Kitashirakawa Oiwake-cho, 
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8502, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto University, Kitashirakawa Oiwake-cho, 
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8502, Japan. morimoto.daichi.65r@kyoto-u.jp.

Chlamydomonas reinhardtii is a well-established microalgal model species with a 
shorter doubling time, which is a promising natural source for the efficient 
production of high-value carotenoids. In the microalgal carotenoid biosynthetic 
pathway, lycopene is converted either into β-carotene by lycopene β-cyclase or 
into α-carotene by lycopene ε-cyclase (LCYE) and lycopene β-cyclase. In this 
study, we overexpressed the LCYE gene in C. reinhardtii to estimate its effect 
on lycopene metabolism and lutein production. Chlamydomonas transformants 
(CrLCYE#L1, #L5, and #L6) produced significantly increased amounts of lutein per 
culture (up to 2.6-fold) without a decrease in cell yields. Likewise, the 
expression levels of LCYE gene in transformants showed a significant increase 
compared with that of the wild-type strain. These results suggest that LCYE 
overexpression enhances the conversion of lycopene to α-carotene, which in turn 
improves lutein productivity. Interestingly, their β-carotene productivity 
appeared to increase slightly rather than decrease. Considering that the 
inhibition of the lycopene cyclization steps often induces higher expression in 
genes upstream of metabolic branches, this result implies that the redirection 
from β-carotene to α-carotene by LCYE overexpression might also enhance upstream 
gene expression, thereby leading to auxiliary β-carotene production.

DOI: 10.1007/s12010-021-03524-w
PMID: 33528746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Fungal Biol. 2021 May;125(5):400-411. doi: 10.1016/j.funbio.2020.12.005.
Epub  2020 Dec 31.

Carotenoid biosynthesis and the evolution of carotenogenesis genes in rust 
fungi.

Wang E(1), Dong C(1), Zhang P(1), Roberts TH(1), Park RF(2).

Author information:
(1)Plant Breeding Institute, Sydney Institute of Agriculture, University of 
Sydney, NSW, 2570, Australia.
(2)Plant Breeding Institute, Sydney Institute of Agriculture, University of 
Sydney, NSW, 2570, Australia. Electronic address: robert.park@sydney.edu.au.

Diseases caused by rust fungi pose a significant threat to global plant 
production. Although carotenoid pigments are produced in spores of nearly all 
rust species, the corresponding biosynthesis pathway(s) have not been 
investigated. Here, candidate genes for carotenoid biosynthesis in Puccinia 
graminis f. sp. tritici (Pgt) were identified, cloned and functionally 
complemented using specifically engineered strains of Escherichia coli. A part 
of the carotenoid biosynthesis pathway in rust fungi was elucidated, with only 
two genes, CrtYB and CrtI, catalysing the reactions from geranyl-geranyl 
diphosphate (GGPP) to γ-carotene. The CrtYB gene encodes a bi-functional 
lycopene cyclase/phytoene synthase, which catalyses the condensation of two GGPP 
into phytoene, as well as the cyclisation of the ψ-end of lycopene to form 
γ-carotene. The CrtI gene encodes a phytoene desaturase that carries out four 
successive desaturations of phytoene, through the intermediates phytofluene and 
neurosporene to lycopene. The evolution of carotenoid pigmentation in rust 
fungi, including Pgt, P. graminis avenae, P. graminis secalis (Pgs), P. graminis 
lolli, P. striiformis f. sp. tritici, P. striiformis f. sp. pseudohordei, 
P. striiformis f. sp. hordei, the "scabrum" rust (putative hybrids between Pgt 
and Pgs), P. triticina, and P. hordei, was investigated by phylogenetic 
analysis. Both CrtYB and CrtI were found to be closely related among rust fungi, 
other pathogenic fungi, and some aphids. Our results provide a springboard to 
increase the understanding of the physiological role(s) of carotenoid pigments 
in rust fungi, to better understand evolution within the Pucciniales, and to 
develop robust molecular diagnostics for rust fungi.

Crown Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.funbio.2020.12.005
PMID: 33910681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Sci Rep. 2021 Jun 16;11(1):12642. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-92010-8.

Marker-assisted pyramiding of lycopene-ε-cyclase, β-carotene hydroxylase1 and 
opaque2 genes for development of biofortified maize hybrids.

Singh J(1), Sharma S(1), Kaur A(1), Vikal Y(2), Cheema AK(1), Bains BK(1), Kaur 
N(3), Gill GK(3), Malhotra PK(1), Kumar A(4), Sharma P(1), Muthusamy V(5), Kaur 
A(6), Chawla JS(3), Hossain F(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Agricultural Biotechnology, Punjab Agricultural University, 
Ludhiana, India.
(2)School of Agricultural Biotechnology, Punjab Agricultural University, 
Ludhiana, India. yvikal-soab@pau.edu.
(3)Department of Plant Breeding and Genetics, Punjab Agricultural University, 
Ludhiana, India.
(4)Department of Plant Breeding and Genetics, Regional Research Station, 
Gurdaspur, India.
(5)Division of Genetics, Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi, 
India.
(6)Department of Food Science and Technology, Punjab Agricultural University, 
Ludhiana, India.

Malnutrition affects growth and development in humans and causes socio-economic 
losses. Normal maize is deficient in essential amino acids, lysine and 
tryptophan; and vitamin-A. Crop biofortification is a sustainable and economical 
approach to alleviate micronutrient malnutrition. We combined favorable alleles 
of crtRB1 and lcyE genes into opaque2 (o2)-based four inbreds viz. QLM11, QLM12, 
QLM13, and QLM14 using marker-assisted backcross breeding. These are parents of 
quality protein maize versions of two elite hybrids viz. Buland and PMH1, grown 
in India. Gene-based SSRs for o2 and InDel markers for crtRB1 and lcyE were 
successfully employed for foreground selection in BC1F1, BC2F1, and BC2F2 
generations. The recurrent parent genome recovery ranged from 88.9 to 96.0% 
among introgressed progenies. Kernels of pyramided lines possessed a high 
concentration of proA (7.14-9.63 ppm), compared to 1.05 to 1.41 ppm in the 
recurrent parents, while lysine and tryptophan ranged from 0.28-0.44% and 
0.07-0.09%, respectively. The reconstituted hybrids (RBuland and RPMH1) showed 
significant enhancement of endosperm proA (6.97-9.82 ppm), tryptophan 
(0.07-0.09%), and lysine (0.29-0.43%), while grain yield was at par with their 
original versions. The dissemination of reconstituted hybrids holds significant 
promise to alleviate vitamin-A deficiency and protein-energy malnutrition in 
developing countries.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-92010-8
PMCID: PMC8209105
PMID: 34135397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


272. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Jul 6;12:699424. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.699424. 
eCollection 2021.

Introduction of the Carotenoid Biosynthesis α-Branch Into Synechocystis sp. PCC 
6803 for Lutein Production.

Lehmann M(1), Vamvaka E(1), Torrado A(1), Jahns P(2), Dann M(1), Rosenhammer 
L(1), Aziba A(1), Leister D(1), Rühle T(1).

Author information:
(1)Plant Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University 
Munich, Munich, Germany.
(2)Plant Biochemistry, Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, 
Germany.

Lutein, made by the α-branch of the methyl-erythritol phosphate (MEP) pathway, 
is one of the most abundant xanthophylls in plants. It is involved in the 
structural stabilization of light-harvesting complexes, transfer of excitation 
energy to chlorophylls and photoprotection. In contrast, lutein and the α-branch 
of the MEP pathway are not present in cyanobacteria. In this study, we 
genetically engineered the cyanobacterium Synechocystis for the missing MEP 
α-branch resulting in lutein accumulation. A cassette comprising four 
Arabidopsis thaliana genes coding for two lycopene cyclases (AtLCYe and AtLCYb) 
and two hydroxylases (AtCYP97A and AtCYP97C) was introduced into a Synechocystis 
strain that lacks the endogenous, cyanobacterial lycopene cyclase cruA. The 
resulting synlut strain showed wild-type growth and only moderate changes in 
total pigment composition under mixotrophic conditions, indicating that the cruA 
deficiency can be complemented by Arabidopsis lycopene cyclases leaving the 
endogenous β-branch intact. A combination of liquid chromatography, UV-Vis 
detection and mass spectrometry confirmed a low but distinct synthesis of lutein 
at rates of 4.8 ± 1.5 nmol per liter culture at OD730 (1.03 ± 0.47 mmol mol-1 
chlorophyll). In conclusion, synlut provides a suitable platform to study the 
α-branch of the plastidic MEP pathway and other functions related to lutein in a 
cyanobacterial host system.

Copyright © 2021 Lehmann, Vamvaka, Torrado, Jahns, Dann, Rosenhammer, Aziba, 
Leister and Rühle.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.699424
PMCID: PMC8291087
PMID: 34295345

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


273. PLoS One. 2021 Jul 27;16(7):e0254709. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0254709. 
eCollection 2021.

Comparative transcriptome analysis of unripe and ripe banana (cv. Nendran) 
unraveling genes involved in ripening and other related processes.

Kaur K(1), Awasthi P(1), Tiwari S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Plant Tissue Culture and Genetic Engineering 
Lab, National Agri-Food Biotechnology Institute (NABI), Ministry of Science and 
Technology (Government of India), Mohali, Punjab, India.

Banana is one of the most important fruit crops consumed globally owing to its 
high nutritional value. Previously, we demonstrated that the ripe pulp of the 
banana cultivar (cv.) Nendran (AAB) contained a high amount of pro-vitamin A 
carotenoids. However, the molecular factors involved in the ripening process in 
Nendran fruit are unexplored. Hence, we commenced a transcriptome study by using 
the Illumina HiSeq 2500 at two stages i.e. unripe and ripe fruit-pulp of 
Nendran. Overall, 3474 up and 4727 down-regulated genes were obtained. A large 
number of identified transcripts were related to genes involved in ripening, 
cell wall degradation and aroma formation. Gene ontology analysis highlighted 
differentially expressed genes that play a key role in various pathways. These 
pathways were mainly linked to cellular, molecular and biological processes. The 
present transcriptome study also reveals a crucial role of up-regulated 
carotenoid biosynthesis pathway genes namely, lycopene beta cyclase and 
geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthase at the ripening stage. Genes related to 
the ripening and other processes like aroma and flavor were highly expressed in 
the ripe pulp. Expression of numerous transcription factor family genes was also 
identified. This study lays a path towards understanding the ripening, 
carotenoid accumulation and other related processes in banana.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0254709
PMCID: PMC8315498
PMID: 34314413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


274. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Aug 26;12:677553. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.677553. 
eCollection 2021.

Daucus carota DcPSY2 and DcLCYB1 as Tools for Carotenoid Metabolic Engineering 
to Improve the Nutritional Value of Fruits.

Arias D(1), Arenas-M A(2), Flores-Ortiz C(1), Peirano C(1), Handford M(1), 
Stange C(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Vegetal, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de 
Chile, Ñuñoa, Chile.
(2)Laboratorio de Nutrición y Genómica de Plantas, Instituto de Bioquímica y 
Microbiología, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Austral de Chile, Valdivia, 
Chile.

Carotenoids are pigments with important nutritional value in the human diet. As 
antioxidant molecules, they act as scavengers of free radicals enhancing 
immunity and preventing cancer and cardiovascular diseases. Moreover, α-carotene 
and β-carotene, the main carotenoids of carrots (Daucus carota) are precursors 
of vitamin A, whose deficiency in the diet can trigger night blindness and 
macular degeneration. With the aim of increasing the carotenoid content in fruit 
flesh, three key genes of the carotenoid pathway, phytoene synthase (DcPSY2) and 
lycopene cyclase (DcLCYB1) from carrots, and carotene desaturase (XdCrtI) from 
the yeast Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous, were optimized for expression in apple 
and cloned under the Solanum chilense (tomatillo) polygalacturonase (PG) fruit 
specific promoter. A biotechnological platform was generated and functionally 
tested by subcellular localization, and single, double and triple combinations 
were both stably transformed in tomatoes (Solanum lycopersicum var. Microtom) 
and transiently transformed in Fuji apple fruit flesh (Malus domestica). We 
demonstrated the functionality of the S. chilense PG promoter by directing the 
expression of the transgenes specifically to fruits. Transgenic tomato fruits 
expressing DcPSY2, DcLCYB1, and DcPSY2-XdCRTI, produced 1.34, 2.0, and 1.99-fold 
more total carotenoids than wild-type fruits, respectively. Furthermore, 
transgenic tomatoes expressing DcLCYB1, DcPSY2-XdCRTI, and DcPSY2-XdCRTI-DcLCYB1 
exhibited an increment in β-carotene levels of 2.5, 3.0, and 2.57-fold in 
comparison with wild-type fruits, respectively. Additionally, Fuji apple flesh 
agroinfiltrated with DcPSY2 and DcLCYB1 constructs showed a significant increase 
of 2.75 and 3.11-fold in total carotenoids and 5.11 and 5.84-fold in β-carotene, 
respectively whereas the expression of DcPSY2-XdCRTI and DcPSY2-XdCRTI-DcLCYB1 
generated lower, but significant changes in the carotenoid profile of 
infiltrated apple flesh. The results in apple demonstrate that DcPSY2 and 
DcLCYB1 are suitable biotechnological genes to increase the carotenoid content 
in fruits of species with reduced amounts of these pigments.

Copyright © 2021 Arias, Arenas-M, Flores-Ortiz, Peirano, Handford and Stange.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.677553
PMCID: PMC8427143
PMID: 34512681

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


275. Plant Biotechnol J. 2022 Mar;20(3):564-576. doi: 10.1111/pbi.13738. Epub
2021  Nov 18.

Mutant combinations of lycopene ɛ-cyclase and β-carotene hydroxylase 2 
homoeologs increased β-carotene accumulation in endosperm of tetraploid wheat 
(Triticum turgidum L.) grains.

Yu S(1), Li M(1), Dubcovsky J(1), Tian L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, University of California, Davis, CA, USA.

Grains of tetraploid wheat (Triticum turgidum L.) mainly accumulate the 
non-provitamin A carotenoid lutein-with low natural variation in provitamin A 
β-carotene in wheat accessions necessitating alternative strategies for 
provitamin A biofortification. Lycopene ɛ-cyclase (LCYe) and β-carotene 
hydroxylase (HYD) function in diverting carbons from β-carotene to lutein 
biosynthesis and catalyzing the turnover of β-carotene to xanthophylls, 
respectively. However, the contribution of LCYe and HYD gene homoeologs to 
carotenoid metabolism and how they can be manipulated to increase β-carotene in 
tetraploid wheat endosperm (flour) is currently unclear. We isolated 
loss-of-function Targeting Induced Local Lesions in Genomes (TILLING) mutants of 
LCYe and HYD2 homoeologs and generated higher order mutant combinations of 
lcye-A, lcye-B, hyd-A2, and hyd-B2. Hyd-A2 hyd-B2, lcye-A hyd-A2 hyd-B2, lcye-B 
hyd-A2 hyd-B2, and lcye-A lcye-B hyd-A2 hyd-B2 achieved significantly increased 
β-carotene in endosperm, with lcye-A hyd-A2 hyd-B2 exhibiting comparable 
photosynthetic performance and light response to control plants. Comparative 
analysis of carotenoid profiles suggests that eliminating HYD2 homoeologs is 
sufficient to prevent β-carotene conversion to xanthophylls in the endosperm 
without compromising xanthophyll production in leaves, and that β-carotene and 
its derived xanthophylls are likely subject to differential catalysis mechanisms 
in vegetative tissues and grains. Carotenoid and gene expression analyses also 
suggest that the very low LCYe-B expression in endosperm is adequate for lutein 
production in the absence of LCYe-A. These results demonstrate the success of 
provitamin A biofortification using TILLING mutants while also providing a 
roadmap for guiding a gene editing-based approach in hexaploid wheat.

© 2021 The Authors. Plant Biotechnology Journal published by Society for 
Experimental Biology and The Association of Applied Biologists and John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pbi.13738
PMCID: PMC8882798
PMID: 34695292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


276. J Cell Physiol. 2022 Feb;237(2):1607-1616. doi: 10.1002/jcp.30647. Epub 2021
Nov  23.

The expression pattern of β-carotene ketolase gene restricts the accumulation of 
astaxanthin in Dunaliella under salt stress.

Chen HH(1), He YJ(1), Liang MH(1), Yan B(2), Jiang JG(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Food Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, 
Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangxi Key Lab of Mangrove Conservation and Utilization, Guangxi Academy of 
Sciences, Guangxi Mangrove Research Center, Beihai, China.

Dunaliella salina can accumulate a large amount of β-carotene which is generally 
considered to be its terminal product of carotenoid metabolism. In this study, 
it was proved that D. salina has the ketolase (DsBKT) of catalyzing the 
synthesis of astaxanthin, the downstream products of β-carotene. Therefore, the 
reason why D. salina does not synthesize astaxanthin is the purpose of this 
study. The enzymatic activity of DsBKT was detected by functional 
complementation assays in Escherichia coli, results showed that DsBKT had 
efficient ketolase activity toward β-carotene and zeaxanthin to produce 
astaxanthin, indicating that there were complete astaxanthin-producing genes in 
Dunaliella. Unlike the induced expression of Lycopene cyclase (catalyzing 
β-carotene synthesis) under salt stress, the expression of DsBKT was very low 
under both normal and stress conditions, which may be the main reason why D. 
salina cannot accumulate astaxanthin. On the contrary, with the astaxanthin-rich 
Haematococcus pluvialis as a control, its BKT gene was significantly upregulated 
under salt stress. Further study showed that DsBKT promoter had strong promoter 
ability and could stably drive the expression of ble-egfp in D. salina. 
Obviously, DsBKT promoter is not the reason of DsBKT not being expressed which 
may be caused by Noncoding RNA.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.30647
PMID: 34812495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


277. FEMS Yeast Res. 2021 Dec 24;21(8):foab062. doi: 10.1093/femsyr/foab062.

Novel carotenogenic gene combinations from red yeasts enhanced lycopene and 
beta-carotene production in Saccharomyces cerevisiae from the low-cost substrate 
sucrose.

Watcharawipas A(1), Sansatchanon K(1), Phithakrotchanakoon C(1), Tanapongpipat 
S(1), Runguphan W(1), Kocharin K(1).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, 113 Thailand 
Science Park, Paholyothin Road, Klong 1, Klong Luang, Pathumthani 12120, 
Thailand.

Erratum in
    FEMS Yeast Res. 2022 Mar 11;22(1):

Carotenoids (C40H56) including lycopene and beta-carotene are relatively strong 
antioxidants that provide benefits to human health. Here, we screened highly 
efficient crt variants from red yeasts to improve lycopene and beta-carotene 
production in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We identified that crt variants from 
Sporidiobolus pararoseus TBRC-BCC 63403 isolated from rice leaf in Thailand 
exhibited the highest activity in term of lycopene and beta-carotene production 
in the context of yeast. Specifically, the phytoene desaturase SpCrtI possessed 
up to 4-fold higher in vivo activity based on lycopene content than the 
benchmark enzyme BtCrtI from Blakeslea trispora in our engineered WWY005 strain. 
Also, the geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP) synthase SpCrtE, the bifunctional 
phytoene synthase-lycopene cyclase SpCrtYB, and SpCrtI when combined led to 
7-fold improvement in beta-carotene content over the benchmark enzymes from 
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous in the laboratory strain CEN.PK2-1C. Sucrose as an 
alternative to glucose was found to enhance lycopene production in cells lacking 
GAL80. Lastly, we demonstrated a step-wise improvement in lycopene production 
from shake-flasks to a 5-L fermenter using the strain with GAL80 intact. 
Altogether, our study represents novel findings on more effective crt genes from 
Sp. pararoseus over the previously reported benchmark genes and their potential 
applications in scale-up lycopene production.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of FEMS. 
All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/femsyr/foab062
PMID: 34865010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2022 Jan;106(1):317-327. doi: 
10.1007/s00253-021-11673-5. Epub 2021 Dec 15.

Impairment of carotenoid biosynthesis through CAR1 gene mutation results in 
CoQ(10), sterols, and phytoene accumulation in Rhodotorula mucilaginosa.

Tkáčová J(1), Zara G(2), Ianiri G(3), Castoria R(3), Čertík M(1), Mannazzu I(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, Faculty of Chemical and Food Technology, Slovak 
University of Technology, Radlinského 9, 812 37, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(2)Department of Agricultural Sciences, Università Degli Studi Di Sassari, 
Associate Member of the JRU MIRRI-IT, Viale Italia 39, 07100, Sassari, Italy.
(3)Department of Agricultural, Environmental and Food Sciences, Università Degli 
Studi del Molise, Via Francesco de Sanctis, 86100, Campobasso, Italy.
(4)Department of Agricultural Sciences, Università Degli Studi Di Sassari, 
Associate Member of the JRU MIRRI-IT, Viale Italia 39, 07100, Sassari, Italy. 
imannazzu@uniss.it.

Red yeasts, mainly included in the genera Rhodotorula, Rhodosporidiobolus, and 
Sporobolomyces, are renowned biocatalysts for the production of a wide range of 
secondary metabolites of commercial interest, among which lipids, carotenoids, 
and other isoprenoids. The production of all these compounds is tightly 
interrelated as they share acetyl-CoA and the mevalonate pathway as common 
intermediates. Here, T-DNA insertional mutagenesis was applied to the wild type 
strain C2.5t1 of Rhodotorula mucilaginosa for the isolation of albino mutants 
with impaired carotenoids biosynthesis. The rationale behind this approach was 
that a blockage in carotenoid biosynthetic pathway could divert carbon flux 
toward the production of lipids and/or other molecules deriving from terpenoid 
precursors. One characterized albino mutant, namely, strain W4, carries a T-DNA 
insertion in the CAR1 gene coding for phytoene desaturase. When cultured in 
glycerol-containing medium, W4 strain showed significant decreases in cell 
density and fatty acids content in respect to the wild type strain. Conversely, 
it reached significantly higher productions of phytoene, CoQ10, and sterols. 
These were supported by an increased expression of CAR2 gene that codes for 
phytoene synthase/lycopene cyclase. Thus, in accordance with the starting 
hypothesis, the impairment of carotenoids biosynthesis can be explored to pursue 
the biotechnological exploitation of red yeasts for enhanced production of 
secondary metabolites with several commercial applications. KEY POINTS: • The 
production of lipids, carotenoids, and other isoprenoids is tightly 
interrelated. • CAR1 gene mutation results in the overproduction of phytoene, 
CoQ10, and sterols. • Albino mutants are promising tools for the production of 
secondary metabolites.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-021-11673-5
PMID: 34910239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Dec 3;12:786208. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.786208. 
eCollection 2021.

Suppression of the Lycopene Cyclase Gene Causes Downregulation of Ascorbate 
Peroxidase Activity and Decreased Glutathione Pool Size, Leading to H(2)O(2) 
Accumulation in Euglena gracilis.

Tamaki S(1), Sato R(1), Koshitsuka Y(1), Asahina M(1)(2), Kodama Y(3), Ishikawa 
T(4), Shinomura T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, School of Science and Engineering, Teikyo 
University, Tochigi, Japan.
(2)Advanced Instrumental Analysis Center, Teikyo University, Tochigi, Japan.
(3)Center for Bioscience Research and Education, Utsunomiya University, Tochigi, 
Japan.
(4)Institute of Agricultural and Life Sciences, Academic Assembly, Shimane 
University, Matsue, Japan.

Carotenoids are photosynthetic pigments and hydrophobic antioxidants that are 
necessary for the survival of photosynthetic organisms, including the microalga 
Euglena gracilis. In the present study, we identified an uncharacterized gene 
encoding the E. gracilis β-carotene synthetic enzyme lycopene cyclase (EgLCY) 
and discovered a relationship between EgLCY-mediated carotenoid synthesis and 
the reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging system ascorbate-glutathione cycle. 
The EgLCY cDNA sequence was obtained via homology searching E. gracilis 
transcriptome data. An enzyme assay using Escherichia coli demonstrated that 
EgLCY converts lycopene to β-carotene. E. gracilis treated with EgLCY 
double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) produced colorless cells with hypertrophic 
appearance, inhibited growth, and marked decrease in carotenoid and chlorophyll 
content, suggesting that EgLCY is essential for the synthesis of β-carotene and 
downstream carotenoids, which are abundant and physiologically functional. In 
EgLCY dsRNA-treated cells, the ascorbate-glutathione cycle, composed of 
ascorbate peroxidase (APX), dehydroascorbate reductase (DHAR), 
monodehydroascorbate reductase (MDAR), and glutathione reductase (GR), was 
unusually modulated; APX and GR activities significantly decreased, whereas DHAR 
and MDAR activities increased. Ascorbate content was significantly increased and 
glutathione content significantly decreased in EgLCY dsRNA-treated cells and was 
correlated with their recycling enzyme activities. Fluorescent imaging 
demonstrated that EgLCY dsRNA-treated cells accumulated higher levels of H2O2 
compared to wild-type cells. Taken together, this study revealed that 
EgLCY-mediated synthesis of β-carotene and downstream carotenoid species 
upregulates APX activity and increases glutathione pool size for H2O2 
scavenging. Our study suggests a possible relationship between carotenoid 
synthesis and the ascorbate-glutathione cycle for ROS scavenging in E. gracilis.

Copyright © 2021 Tamaki, Sato, Koshitsuka, Asahina, Kodama, Ishikawa and 
Shinomura.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.786208
PMCID: PMC8678482
PMID: 34925426

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


280. BMC Plant Biol. 2022 Jan 17;22(1):34. doi: 10.1186/s12870-021-03415-6.

Analyses of key gene networks controlling carotenoid metabolism in Xiangfen 1 
banana.

Dong C(#)(1), Wang J(#)(1), Hu Y(1), Xiao W(1), Hu H(2), Xie J(3).

Author information:
(1)South Subtropical Crop Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Tropical 
Agricultural Science/ Key Laboratory of Tropical Fruit Biology, Ministry of 
Agriculture/Key Laboratory of Hainan Province for Postharvest Physiology and 
Technology of Tropical Horticultural Products, Zhanjiang, Guangdong, 524091, 
China.
(2)South Subtropical Crop Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Tropical 
Agricultural Science/ Key Laboratory of Tropical Fruit Biology, Ministry of 
Agriculture/Key Laboratory of Hainan Province for Postharvest Physiology and 
Technology of Tropical Horticultural Products, Zhanjiang, Guangdong, 524091, 
China. huhuigang@sina.com.
(3)South Subtropical Crop Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Tropical 
Agricultural Science/ Key Laboratory of Tropical Fruit Biology, Ministry of 
Agriculture/Key Laboratory of Hainan Province for Postharvest Physiology and 
Technology of Tropical Horticultural Products, Zhanjiang, Guangdong, 524091, 
China. 313972374@qq.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Banana fruits are rich in various high-value metabolites and play a 
key role in the human diet. Of these components, carotenoids have attracted 
considerable attention due to their physiological role and human health care 
functions. However, the accumulation patterns of carotenoids and genome-wide 
analysis of gene expression during banana fruit development have not been 
comprehensively evaluated.
RESULTS: In the present study, an integrative analysis of metabolites and 
transcriptome profiles in banana fruit with three different development stages 
was performed. A total of 11 carotenoid compounds were identified, and most of 
these compounds showed markedly higher abundances in mature green and/or mature 
fruit than in young fruit. Results were linked to the high expression of 
carotenoid synthesis and regulatory genes in the middle and late stages of fruit 
development. Co-expression network analysis revealed that 79 differentially 
expressed transcription factor genes may be responsible for the regulation of 
LCYB (lycopene β-cyclase), a key enzyme catalyzing the biosynthesis of α- and 
β-carotene.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, the study provided new insights into the 
understanding of dynamic changes in carotenoid content and gene expression level 
during banana fruit development.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12870-021-03415-6
PMCID: PMC8762954
PMID: 35038993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


281. Nat Commun. 2022 Jan 31;13(1):572. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-28277-w.

Removal of lycopene substrate inhibition enables high carotenoid productivity in 
Yarrowia lipolytica.

Ma Y(1)(2), Liu N(1)(3), Greisen P(4), Li J(1), Qiao K(1), Huang S(5), 
Stephanopoulos G(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA.
(2)Shenzhen Branch, Guangdong Laboratory of Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Genome 
Analysis Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, 
Agricultural Genomics Institute at Shenzhen, Chinese Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences, Shenzhen, 518120, China.
(3)Bristol Myers Squibb, 400 Dexter Ave N, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA.
(4)Global Research, Novo Nordisk A/S, Måløv, DK-2760, Denmark.
(5)Shenzhen Branch, Guangdong Laboratory of Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Genome 
Analysis Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, 
Agricultural Genomics Institute at Shenzhen, Chinese Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences, Shenzhen, 518120, China. huangsanwen@caas.cn.
(6)Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA. gregstep@mit.edu.

Substrate inhibition of enzymes can be a major obstacle to the production of 
valuable chemicals in engineered microorganisms. Here, we show substrate 
inhibition of lycopene cyclase as the main limitation in carotenoid biosynthesis 
in Yarrowia lipolytica. To overcome this bottleneck, we exploit two independent 
approaches. Structure-guided protein engineering yields a variant, Y27R, 
characterized by complete loss of substrate inhibition without reduction of 
enzymatic activity. Alternatively, establishing a geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate 
synthase-mediated flux flow restrictor also prevents the onset of substrate 
inhibition by diverting metabolic flux away from the inhibitory metabolite while 
maintaining sufficient flux towards product formation. Both approaches result in 
high levels of near-exclusive β-carotene production. Ultimately, we construct 
strains capable of producing 39.5 g/L β-carotene at a productivity of 
0.165 g/L/h in bioreactor fermentations (a 1441-fold improvement over the 
initial strain). Our findings provide effective approaches for removing 
substrate inhibition in engineering pathways for efficient synthesis of natural 
products.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-28277-w
PMCID: PMC8803881
PMID: 35102143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


282. BMC Plant Biol. 2022 Mar 17;22(1):123. doi: 10.1186/s12870-022-03509-9.

Comparative transcriptomics of wild and commercial Citrus during early ripening 
reveals how domestication shaped fruit gene expression.

Borredá C(1), Perez-Roman E(1), Talon M(1), Terol J(2).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Genómica, Instituto Valenciano de Investigaciones Agrarias (IVIA), 
46113, Moncada, Valencia, Spain.
(2)Centro de Genómica, Instituto Valenciano de Investigaciones Agrarias (IVIA), 
46113, Moncada, Valencia, Spain. terol_javalc@gva.es.

BACKGROUND: Interspecific hybridizations and admixtures were key in Citrus 
domestication, but very little is known about their impact at the transcriptomic 
level. To determine the effects of genome introgressions on gene expression, the 
transcriptomes of the pulp and flavedo of three pure species (citron, pure 
mandarin and pummelo) and four derived domesticated genetic admixtures (sour 
orange, sweet orange, lemon and domesticated mandarin) have been analyzed at 
color break.
RESULTS: Many genes involved in relevant physiological processes for 
domestication, such sugar/acid metabolism and carotenoid/flavonoid synthesis, 
were differentially expressed among samples. In the low-sugar, highly acidic 
species lemon and citron, many genes involved in sugar metabolism, the TCA cycle 
and GABA shunt displayed a reduced expression, while the P-type ATPase CitPH5 
and most subunits of the vacuolar ATPase were overexpressed. The red-colored 
species and admixtures were generally characterized by the overexpression in the 
flavedo of specific pivotal genes involved in the carotenoid biosynthesis, 
including phytoene synthase, ζ-carotene desaturase, β-lycopene cyclase and 
CCD4b, a carotenoid cleavage dioxygenase. The expression patterns of many genes 
involved in flavonoid modifications, especially the flavonoid and 
phenylpropanoid O-methyltransferases showed extreme diversity. However, the most 
noticeable differential expression was shown by a chalcone synthase gene, which 
catalyzes a key step in the biosynthesis of flavonoids. This chalcone synthase 
was exclusively expressed in mandarins and their admixed species, which only 
expressed the mandarin allele. In addition, comparisons between wild and 
domesticated mandarins revealed that the major differences between their 
transcriptomes concentrate in the admixed regions.
CONCLUSION: In this work we present a first study providing broad evidence that 
the genome introgressions that took place during citrus domestication largely 
shaped gene expression in their fruits.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12870-022-03509-9
PMCID: PMC8928680
PMID: 35300613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


283. BMC Plant Biol. 2022 May 21;22(1):252. doi: 10.1186/s12870-022-03634-5.

Functional characterization and comparison of lycopene epsilon-cyclase genes in 
Nicotiana tabacum.

Song W(#)(1)(2), Wei F(#)(2), Gao S(#)(3), Dong C(1)(4), Hao J(2), Jin L(5), Li 
F(5), Wei P(5), Guo J(3), Wang R(6).

Author information:
(1)College of Life Sciences, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou, 450002, 
Henan, China.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, 450001, Henan, 
China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Plant Stress Biology, State Key Laboratory of Cotton 
Biology, School of Life Sciences, Henan University, Kaifeng, 475001, Henan, 
China.
(4)College of Biological Engineering, Henan University of Technology, Zhengzhou, 
450001, Henan, China.
(5)Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute, Zhengzhou, 450001, Henan, China.
(6)College of Life Sciences, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou, 450002, 
Henan, China. wangran@henau.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Lycopene epsilon-cyclase (ε-LCY) is a key enzyme in the carotenoid 
biosynthetic pathway (CBP) of higher plants. In previous work, we cloned two 
Ntε-LCY genes from allotetraploid tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum), Ntε-LCY2 and 
Ntε-LCY1, and demonstrated the overall effect of Ntε-LCY genes on carotenoid 
biosynthesis and stress resistance. However, their genetic and functional 
characteristics require further research in polyploid plants.
RESULTS: Here, we used CRISPR/Cas9 to obtain Ntε-LCY2 and Ntε-LCY1 mutants in 
allotetraploid N.tabacum K326. Ntε-LCY2 and Ntε-LCY1 had similar promoter 
cis-acting elements, including light-responsive elements. The Ntε-LCY genes were 
expressed in roots, stems, leaves, flowers, and young fruit, and their highest 
expression levels were found in leaves. Ntε-LCY2 and Ntε-LCY1 genes responded 
differently to normal light and high light stress. Both the Ntε-LCY2 and the 
Ntε-LCY1 mutants had a more rapid leaf growth rate, especially ntε-lcy2-1. The 
expression levels of CBP genes were increased in the ntε-lcy mutants, and their 
total carotenoid content was higher. Under both normal light and high light 
stress, the ntε-lcy mutants had higher photosynthetic capacities and heat 
dissipation levels than the wild type, and this was especially true of 
ntε-lcy2-1. The reactive oxygen species content was lower in leaves of the 
ntε-lcy mutants.
CONCLUSION: In summary, the expression patterns and biological functions of the 
Ntε-LCY genes Ntε-LCY1 and Ntε-LCY2 differed in several respects. The mutation 
of Ntε-LCY2 was associated with a greater increase in the content of chlorophyll 
and various carotenoid components, and it enhanced the stress resistance of 
tobacco plants under high light.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12870-022-03634-5
PMCID: PMC9123772
PMID: 35597910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest.


284. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Sep 8;23(18):10383. doi: 10.3390/ijms231810383.

Genome Editing of Golden SNP-Carrying Lycopene Epsilon-Cyclase (LcyE) Gene Using 
the CRSPR-Cas9/HDR and Geminiviral Replicon System in Rice.

Kim JH(1), Yu J(2), Kim HK(1), Kim JY(1), Kim MS(3), Cho YG(3), Bae S(4), Kang 
KK(1)(5), Jung YJ(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Horticultural Biotechnology, School of Biotechnology, Hankyong 
National University, Anseong 17579, Korea.
(2)Division of Life Sciences, Korea Polar Research Institute, Incheon 21990, 
Korea.
(3)Department of Crop Science, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju 28644, 
Korea.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, Seoul 03080, Korea.
(5)Institute of Genetic Engineering, Hankyong National University, Anseong 
17579, Korea.

Lycopene epsilon-cyclase (LcyE) is a key enzyme in the carotenoid biosynthetic 
pathway of higher plants. Using the CRSPR/Cas9 and the geminiviral replicon, we 
optimized a method for targeted mutagenesis and golden SNP replacement of the 
LcyE gene in rice. We have exploited the geminiviral replicon amplification as a 
means to provide a large amount of donor template for the repair of a 
CRISPR-Cas-induced DNA double-strand break (DSB) in the target gene via 
homology-directed repair (HDR). Mutagenesis experiments performed on the Donggin 
variety achieved precise modification of the LcyE loci with an efficiency of up 
to 90%. In HDR experiments, our target was the LcyE allele (LcyE-H523L) derived 
from anther culture containing a golden SNP replacement. The phenotype of the 
homologous recombination (HR) mutant obtained through the geminiviral 
replicon-based template delivery system was tangerine color, and the frequency 
was 1.32% of the transformed calli. In addition, the total carotenoid content of 
the LcyEsg2-HDR1 and LcyEsg2-HDR2 lines was 6.8-9.6 times higher than that of 
the wild-type (WT) calli, respectively. The reactive oxygen species content was 
lower in the LcyEsg2-HDR1 and LcyEsg2-HDR2 lines. These results indicate that 
efficient HDR can be achieved in the golden SNP replacement using a single and 
modular configuration applicable to different rice targets and other crops. This 
work demonstrates the potential to replace all genes with elite alleles within 
one generation and greatly expands our ability to improve agriculturally 
important traits.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms231810383
PMCID: PMC9499184
PMID: 36142294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest 
relevant to this study to disclose.


285. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek. 2022 Dec;115(12):1393-1404. doi: 
10.1007/s10482-022-01783-z. Epub 2022 Oct 17.

Hybrid histidine kinase HisK2301 modulates carotenoid production to counteract 
cold-induced oxidative stress in Rhodosporidium kratochvilovae YM25235 under low 
temperature.

He M(#)(1), Yang X(#)(1), Liu T(1), Zhang X(1), Ji X(1), Wei Y(1), Zhang Q(2).

Author information:
(1)Rm B108, Faculty of Life Science and Technology, Kunming University of 
Science and Technology, 727 South Jingming Road, Chenggong District, Kunming, 
650500, Yunnan Province, China.
(2)Rm B108, Faculty of Life Science and Technology, Kunming University of 
Science and Technology, 727 South Jingming Road, Chenggong District, Kunming, 
650500, Yunnan Province, China. qizhang_2018@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Hybrid histidine kinases (HHKs) are major sensor proteins for fungi that 
contribute to stress tolerance. In the present work, we investigated the roles 
and mechanisms of the HHK HisK2301 in cold-adapted Rhodosporidium kratochvilovae 
strain YM25235. The HisK2301 deletion strain was constructed by homologous 
recombination method and arranged for multiple stress tests. We analysed the 
content of carotenoid using UV-Vis and HPLC. Relative transcript levels of genes 
phytoene desaturase (RKCrtI) and phytoene synthase and lycopene cyclase 
(RKCrtYB) were analysed by RT-qPCR. Intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
generation was measured using 2',7'-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate 
(DCFH-DA). Our results clearly indicated that YM25235 produces γ-carotene, 
torulene, β-carotene and torularhodin, with the latter two components strongly 
related to adapt to cold. HisK2301 is crucial for YM25235 adaptation to 
different types of stress such as cold, salt, osmotic and oxidative stress. 
Growth at low temperature clearly induced oxidative stress in YM25235, as more 
ROS accumulated at cold. During cold stress, HisK2301 is suggested to sense 
cold-induced ROS signals and then promote carotenoid production partially by 
RKCrtI and RKCrtYB to scavenge excessive ROS production. Such an inducible 
protective system may confer YM25235 fast response and better adaptation to cold 
stress. To conclude, our findings give the first insight into the effect of 
HisK2301 on carotenoid biosynthesis and cold-induced oxidative stress in fungi 
under low temperature and suggest the potential use of the cold-adapted HHK 
HisK2301 in industrial production of carotenoid.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s10482-022-01783-z
PMID: 36251106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Front Plant Sci. 2022 Oct 18;13:1034204. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2022.1034204. 
eCollection 2022.

A comprehensive analysis of carotenoids metabolism in two red-fleshed mutants of 
Navel and Valencia sweet oranges (Citrus sinensis).

Zacarías-García J(1), Cronje PJ(2), Diretto G(3), Zacarías L(1), Rodrigo MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biotecnología de Alimentos, Instituto de Agroquímica y 
Tecnología de Alimentos (IATA), Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas 
(CSIC), Valencia, Spain.
(2)Citrus Research International (CRI), Department of Horticultural Sciences, 
University of Stellenbosch, Stellenbosch, South Africa.
(3)Italian National Agency for New Technologies, Energy, and Sustainable 
Development (ENEA), Biotechnology Laboratory, Casaccia Research Center, Roma, 
Italy.

Kirkwood Navel and Ruby Valencia are two spontaneous bud mutations of the 
respective parental lines of sweet orange (Citrus sinensis) Palmer Navel and 
Olinda Valencia, showing an atypical red pigmentation of the pulp. These 
red-fleshed varieties are commercially available and highly attractive for 
consumers but their carotenoid metabolism and the basis of the mutation have not 
been investigated. The red colour of Kirkwood and Ruby pulp was observed from 
the very early stages of fruit development until full maturity and associated 
with an altered carotenoid profiling. The red-fleshed varieties accumulated from 
6- up to 1000-times more total carotenoids compared to the standard oranges. 
Specifically, the pulp of Kirkwood and Ruby accumulated large amounts of 
phytoene and phytofluene, and moderate contents of lycopene. Moreover, the 
red-fleshed oranges contained other unusual carotenes as δ-carotene, and lower 
concentrations of downstream products such as β,β-xanthophylls, abscisic acid 
(ABA) and ABA-glucosyl ester. This peculiar profile was associated with 
chromoplasts with lycopene crystalloid structures and round vesicles likely 
containing colourless carotenes. The flavedo and leaves of Kirkwood and Ruby 
showed minor changes in carotenoids, mainly limited to higher levels of 
phytoene. The carotenoid composition in Kirkwood and Ruby fruits was not 
explained by differences in the transcriptional profile of 26 genes related to 
carotenoid metabolism, covering the main steps of biosynthesis, catabolism and 
other processes related to carotenoid accumulation. Moreover, sequence analysis 
of the lycopene cyclase genes revealed no alterations in those of the 
red-fleshed oranges compared to the genes of the standard varieties. A striking 
event observed in Kirkwood and Ruby trees was the reddish coloration of the 
inner side of the bark tissue, with larger amounts of phytoene, accumulation of 
lycopene and lower ABA content. These observation lead to the conclusion that 
the mutation is not only manifested in fruit, affecting other carotenogenic 
tissues of the mutant plants, but with different consequences in the carotenoid 
profile. Overall, the carotenoid composition in the red-fleshed mutants suggests 
a partial blockage of the lycopene β-cyclization in the carotenoid pathway, 
rendering a high accumulation of carotenes upstream lycopene and a reduced flow 
to downstream xanthophylls and ABA.

Copyright © 2022 Zacarías-García, Cronje, Diretto, Zacarías and Rodrigo.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2022.1034204
PMCID: PMC9623303
PMID: 36330241

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


287. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2022 Dec 28;32(12):1622-1631. doi: 
10.4014/jmb.2208.08044. Epub 2022 Oct 31.

DsLCYB Directionally Modulated β-Carotene of the Green Alga Dunaliella salina 
under Red Light Stress.

Lan Y(1), Song Y(1), Guo Y(1), Qiao D(1), Cao Y(1), Xu H(1).

Author information:
(1)Microbiology and Metabolic Engineering Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, 
College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, P.R. China.

Carotenoids, which are natural pigments found abundantly in wide-ranging 
species, have diverse functions and high industrial potential. The carotenoid 
biosynthesis pathway is very complex and has multiple branches, while the 
accumulation of certain metabolites often affects other metabolites in this 
pathway. The DsLCYB gene that encodes lycopene cyclase was selected in this 
study to evaluate β-carotene production and the accumulation of β-carotene in 
the alga Dunaliella salina. Compared with the wild type, the transgenic algal 
species overexpressed the DsLCYB gene, resulting in a significant enhancement of 
the total carotenoid content, with the total amount reaching 8.46 mg/g for an 
increase of up to 1.26-fold. Interestingly, the production of α-carotene in the 
transformant was not significantly reduced. This result indicated that the 
regulation of DsLCYB on the metabolic flux distribution of carotenoid 
biosynthesis is directional. Moreover, the effects of different light-quality 
conditions on β-carotene production in D. salina strains were investigated. The 
results showed that the carotenoid components of β-carotene and β-cryptoxanthin 
were 1.8-fold and 1.23-fold higher than that in the wild type under red light 
stress, respectively. This suggests that the accumulation of β-carotene under 
red light conditions is potentially more profitable.

DOI: 10.4014/jmb.2208.08044
PMCID: PMC9843872
PMID: 36384973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors have no 
financial conflicts of interest to declare.


288. Antioxidants (Basel). 2022 Nov 17;11(11):2267. doi: 10.3390/antiox11112267.

Concurrent Production of α- and β-Carotenes with Different Stoichiometries 
Displaying Diverse Antioxidative Activities via Lycopene Cyclases-Based Rational 
System.

Luo H(1), He W(2), Dai Z(2), Zhang Z(2)(3), Bao Y(1), Li D(2)(3), Zhu P(4).

Author information:
(1)College of Forestry, Northeast Forestry University, Harbin 150040, China.
(2)Institute of Agro-Product Processing, Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences, Nanjing 210014, China.
(3)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Food Quality and Safety-State Key Laboratory 
Cultivation Base, Ministry of Science and Technology, Nanjing 210014, China.
(4)College of Food Science and Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University, 
Nanjing 210095, China.

α- and β-carotenes belong to the most essential carotenoids in the human body 
and display remarkable pharmacological value for health due to their beneficial 
antioxidant activities. Distinct high α-/β-carotene stoichiometries have gained 
increasing attention for their effective preventions of Alzheimer's disease, 
cardiovascular disease, and cancer. However, it is extremely difficult to obtain 
α-carotene in nature, impeding the accumulations of high α-/β-carotene 
stoichiometries and excavation of their antioxidant activities. Herein, we 
developed a dynamically operable strategy based on lycopene cyclases (LCYB and 
LCYE) for concurrently enriching α- and β-carotenes along with high 
stoichiometries in E. coli. Membrane-targeted and promoter-centered approaches 
were firstly implemented to spatially enhance catalytic efficiency and 
temporally boost expression of TeLCYE to address its low competitivity at the 
starting stage. Dynamically temperature-dependent regulation of TeLCYE and 
TeLCYB was then performed to finally achieve α-/β-carotene stoichiometries of 
4.71 at 37 °C, 1.65 at 30 °C, and 1.06 at 25 °C, respectively. In the meantime, 
these α-/β-carotene ratios were confirmed to result in diverse antioxidative 
activities. According to our knowledge, this is the first time that both the 
widest range and antioxidant activities of high α/β-carotene stoichiometries 
were reported in any organism. Our work provides attractive potentials for 
obtaining natural products with competitivity and a new insight on the 
protective potentials of α-/β-carotenes with high ratios for health supply.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox11112267
PMCID: PMC9686992
PMID: 36421453

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


289. BMC Microbiol. 2022 Dec 24;22(1):319. doi: 10.1186/s12866-022-02728-2.

Carotenoid biosynthesis is associated with low-temperature adaptation in 
Rhodosporidium kratochvilovae.

Guo R(1), Liu T(1), Guo C(1), Chen G(1), Fan J(1), Zhang Q(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Life Science and Technology, Kunming University of Science and 
Technology, Kunming, 650500, China.
(2)Faculty of Life Science and Technology, Kunming University of Science and 
Technology, Kunming, 650500, China. qzhang37@kust.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Low temperatures greatly limit the growth of microorganisms. 
Low-temperature adaptation in microorganisms involves multiple mechanisms. 
Carotenoids are naturally occurring lipid-soluble pigments that act as 
antioxidants and protect cells and tissues from the harmful effects of free 
radicals and singlet oxygen. However, studies on the regulation of carotenoid 
biosynthesis at low temperatures in microorganisms are limited. In this study, 
we investigated the correlation between carotenoids and low-temperature 
adaptation in the cold-adapted strain of Rhodosporidium kratochvilovae YM25235.
RESULTS: Carotenoid biosynthesis in YM25235 was inhibited by knocking out the 
bifunctional lycopene cyclase/phytoene synthase gene (RKCrtYB) using the 
established CRISPR/Cas9 gene-editing system based on endogenous U6 promoters. 
The carotenoids were extracted with acetone, and the content and composition of 
the carotenoids were analyzed by spectrophotometry and HPLC. Then, the levels of 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the growth rate in YM25235 were determined at 
a low temperature. The results indicated that the carotenoid biosynthesis and 
ROS levels were increased in the YM25235 strain at a low temperature and 
inhibition of carotenoid biosynthesis was associated with higher ROS levels and 
a significant decrease in the growth rate of YM25235 at a low temperature.
CONCLUSIONS: The regulation of carotenoid biosynthesis was associated with 
low-temperature adaptation in YM25235. Our findings provided a strong foundation 
for conducting further studies on the mechanism by which YM25235 can adapt to 
low-temperature stress.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-022-02728-2
PMCID: PMC9789556
PMID: 36564716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no competing 
interests that could have impacted the present research in any way.


290. Plant Physiol. 2023 Apr 3;191(4):2414-2426. doi: 10.1093/plphys/kiad001.

Zeaxanthin is required for eyespot formation and phototaxis in Euglena gracilis.

Tamaki S(1), Ozasa K(2), Nomura T(1)(3), Ishikawa M(1), Yamada K(1)(4), Suzuki 
K(1)(4), Mochida K(1)(3)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Microalgae Production Control Technology Laboratory, RIKEN Baton Zone 
Program, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.
(2)RIKEN Center for Advanced Photonics, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.
(3)RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.
(4)euglena Co., Ltd., Tokyo 108-0014, Japan.
(5)Kihara Institute for Biological Research, Yokohama City University, Yokohma 
244-0812, Japan.
(6)School of Information and Data Sciences, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki 
852-8521, Japan.

The eyespot apparatus is an organelle that forms carotenoid-rich globules in 
diverse flagellated microalgae and functions in phototaxis. The euglenophytes 
have structurally and functionally distinct eyespot apparatuses from 
chlorophytes. β-Carotene is the most abundant pigment detected in chlorophytes' 
eyespots, while xanthophylls such as zeaxanthin and diadinoxanthin have been 
suggested to function in euglenophytes' eyespots. Here, we investigated the 
association between carotenoid composition and eyespot formation via 
pathway-scale mutagenesis using clustered regularly interspaced short 
palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/CRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9)-mediated genome 
editing in the euglenophyte Euglena gracilis. Lycopene cyclase (lcy) mutants 
exhibited sole lycopene accumulation, defective red eyespots, and phototactic 
insensitivity. Conversely, β-carotene hydroxylase (cytochrome P450 97h1, 
cyp97h1) mutants accumulated β-carotene and its hydroxylated products 
β-cryptoxanthin and zeaxanthin and formed phototactic eyespot apparatuses, while 
cyp97h1 cyp97f2 double mutants were deficient in β-carotene hydroxylation and 
mostly lacked functional eyespots. Thus, zeaxanthin is required for the stable 
formation of functional eyespots in E. gracilis, highlighting evolutionary 
differences between euglenophytes and chlorophytes in the metabolic regulation 
of photoreactive organelle formation.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of American 
Society of Plant Biologists.

DOI: 10.1093/plphys/kiad001
PMCID: PMC10069888
PMID: 36611254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. This study was 
partially supported by a matching fund-based research program between RIKEN and 
euglena Co., Ltd.


291. Genome Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 3;15(3):evad029. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evad029.

Horizontal Gene Transfer and Fusion Spread Carotenogenesis Among Diverse 
Heterotrophic Protists.

Rius M(1), Rest JS(2), Filloramo GV(3), Novák Vanclová AMG(4)(5), Archibald 
JM(3), Collier JL(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Marine and Atmospheric Sciences, Stony Brook University.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolution, Stony Brook University.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dalhousie University, 
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(4)Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, Vestec, Czechia.
(5)Present address: Institut de Biologie de l'École Normale Supérieure, Paris 
75005, France.

Thraustochytrids (phylum: Labyrinthulomycota) are nonphotosynthetic marine 
protists. Some thraustochytrids have crtIBY, a trifunctional fusion gene 
encoding a protein capable of β-carotene biosynthesis from geranylgeranyl 
pyrophosphate. Here we show that crtIBY is essential in, and encodes the sole 
pathway for, carotenoid biosynthesis in the thraustochytrid Aurantiochytrium 
limacinum ATCC MYA-1381. We explore the evolutionary origins of CrtIBY and 
discover that the closest related protein domains are present in a small but 
diverse group of other heterotrophic protists, including the apusomonad 
Thecamonas trahens and the dinoflagellates Oxyrrhis marina and Noctiluca 
scintillans. Each organism within this cluster also contains one or more 
β-carotene 15-15' oxygenase genes (blh and rpe65), suggesting that the 
acquisition of β-carotene biosynthesis genes may have been related to the 
production of retinal. Our findings support a novel origin of eukaryotic 
(apo)carotenoid biosynthesis by horizontal gene transfer from Actinobacteria, 
Bacteroidetes, and/or Archaea. This reveals a remarkable case of parallel 
evolution of eukaryotic (apo)carotenogenesis in divergent protistan lineages by 
repeated gene transfers.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evad029
PMCID: PMC10016063
PMID: 36805209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2023 Feb 6;11:1085268. doi:
10.3389/fbioe.2023.1085268.  eCollection 2023.

Optogenetic control of beta-carotene bioproduction in yeast across multiple 
lab-scales.

Pouzet S(1), Cruz-Ramón J(1), Le Bec M(1), Cordier C(1), Banderas A(1), Barral 
S(1), Castaño-Cerezo S(2), Lautier T(2)(3), Truan G(2), Hersen P(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut Curie, Université PSL, Sorbonne Université, CNRS UMR168, Laboratoire 
Physico Chimie Curie, Paris, France.
(2)Toulouse Biotechnology Institute, Université de Toulouse, Centre National de 
la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Institut National de Recherche pour 
l'Agriculture, l'Alimentation et l'Environnement (INRAE), Institut National des 
Sciences Appliquées (INSA), Toulouse, France.
(3)CNRS@CREATE, Singapore Institute of Food and Biotechnology Innovation, Agency 
for Science Technology and Research, Singapore, Singapore.

Optogenetics arises as a valuable tool to precisely control genetic circuits in 
microbial cell factories. Light control holds the promise of optimizing 
bioproduction methods and maximizing yields, but its implementation at different 
steps of the strain development process and at different culture scales remains 
challenging. In this study, we aim to control beta-carotene bioproduction using 
optogenetics in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and investigate how its performance 
translates across culture scales. We built four lab-scale illumination devices, 
each handling different culture volumes, and each having specific illumination 
characteristics and cultivating conditions. We evaluated optogenetic activation 
and beta-carotene production across devices and optimized them both 
independently. Then, we combined optogenetic induction and beta-carotene 
production to make a light-inducible beta-carotene producer strain. This was 
achieved by placing the transcription of the bifunctional lycopene 
cyclase/phytoene synthase CrtYB under the control of the pC120 optogenetic 
promoter regulated by the EL222-VP16 light-activated transcription factor, while 
other carotenogenic enzymes (CrtI, CrtE, tHMG) were expressed constitutively. We 
show that illumination, culture volume and shaking impact differently 
optogenetic activation and beta-carotene production across devices. This enabled 
us to determine the best culture conditions to maximize light-induced 
beta-carotene production in each of the devices. Our study exemplifies the 
stakes of scaling up optogenetics in devices of different lab scales and sheds 
light on the interplays and potential conflicts between optogenetic control and 
metabolic pathway efficiency. As a general principle, we propose that it is 
important to first optimize both components of the system independently, before 
combining them into optogenetic producing strains to avoid extensive 
troubleshooting. We anticipate that our results can help designing both strains 
and devices that could eventually lead to larger scale systems in an effort to 
bring optogenetics to the industrial scale.

Copyright © 2023 Pouzet, Cruz-Ramón, Le Bec, Cordier, Banderas, Barral, 
Castaño-Cerezo, Lautier, Truan and Hersen.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2023.1085268
PMCID: PMC9939774
PMID: 36814715

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


293. Mol Biotechnol. 2023 Nov;65(11):1923-1934. doi: 10.1007/s12033-023-00693-3.
Epub  2023 Mar 8.

Carotenoid Pathway Engineering in Tobacco Chloroplast Using a Synthetic Operon.

Tanwar N(1)(2), Rookes JE(2), Cahill DM(2), Lenka SK(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)TERI-Deakin Nano-Biotechnology Centre, The Energy Resources Institute (TERI), 
New Delhi, 110003, India.
(2)School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Deakin University, Waurn Ponds 
Campus, Geelong, VIC, 3216, Australia.
(3)TERI-Deakin Nano-Biotechnology Centre, The Energy Resources Institute (TERI), 
New Delhi, 110003, India. keshari2u@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Plant Biotechnology, Gujarat Biotechnology University, 
Gandhinagar, 382355, India. keshari2u@gmail.com.

The carotenoid pathway in plants has been altered through metabolic engineering 
to enhance their nutritional value and generate keto-carotenoids, which are 
widely sought after in the food, feed, and human health industries. In this 
study, the aim was to produce keto-carotenoids by manipulating the native 
carotenoid pathway in tobacco plants through chloroplast engineering. 
Transplastomic tobacco plants were generated that express a synthetic multigene 
operon composed of three heterologous genes, with Intercistronic Expression 
Elements (IEEs) for effective mRNA splicing. The metabolic changes observed in 
the transplastomic plants showed a significant shift towards the xanthophyll 
cycle, with only a minor production of keto-lutein. The use of a ketolase gene 
in combination with the lycopene cyclase and hydroxylase genes was a novel 
approach and demonstrated a successful redirection of the carotenoid pathway 
towards the xanthophyll cycle and the production of keto-lutein. This study 
presents a scalable molecular genetic platform for the development of novel 
keto-carotenoids in tobacco using the Design-Build-Test-Learn (DBTL) approach. 
This study corroborates chloroplast metabolic engineering using a synthetic 
biology approach for producing novel metabolites belonging to carotenoid class 
in industrially important tobacco plant. The synthetic multigene construct 
resulted in producing a novel metabolite, keto-lutein with high accumulation of 
xanthophyll metabolites. This figure was drawn using BioRender ( 
https://www.biorender.com ).

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12033-023-00693-3
PMID: 36884112


294. Plant J. 2023 Aug;115(4):986-1003. doi: 10.1111/tpj.16275. Epub 2023 May 19.

Lycopene ε-cyclase mediated transition of α-carotene and β-carotene metabolic 
flow in carrot fleshy root.

Wang YH(1), Zhang YQ(1), Zhang RR(1), Zhuang FY(2), Liu H(1), Xu ZS(1), Xiong 
AS(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement and 
Utilization, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs Key Laboratory of Biology 
and Germplasm Enhancement of Horticultural Crops in East China, College of 
Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, 210095, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Horticultural Crop Biology and Germplasm Innovation, 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Institute of Vegetables and Flowers, 
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, 100081, China.

The accumulation of carotenoids, such as xanthophylls, lycopene, and carotenes, 
is responsible for the color of carrot (Daucus carota subsp. sativus) fleshy 
roots. The potential role of DcLCYE, encoding a lycopene ε-cyclase associated 
with carrot root color, was investigated using cultivars with orange and red 
roots. The expression of DcLCYE in red carrot varieties was significantly lower 
than that in orange carrots at the mature stage. Furthermore, red carrots 
accumulated larger amounts of lycopene and lower levels of α-carotene. Sequence 
comparison and prokaryotic expression analysis revealed that amino acid 
differences in red carrots did not affect the cyclization function of DcLCYE. 
Analysis of the catalytic activity of DcLCYE revealed that it mainly formed 
ε-carotene, while a side activity on α-carotene and γ-carotene was also 
observed. Comparative analysis of the promoter region sequences indicated that 
differences in the promoter region may affect the transcription of DcLCYE. 
DcLCYE was overexpressed in the red carrot 'Benhongjinshi' under the control of 
the CaMV35S promoter. Lycopene in transgenic carrot roots was cyclized, 
resulting in the accumulation of higher levels of α-carotene and xanthophylls, 
while the β-carotene content was significantly decreased. The expression levels 
of other genes in the carotenoid pathway were simultaneously upregulated. 
Knockout of DcLCYE in the orange carrot 'Kurodagosun' by CRISPR/Cas9 technology 
resulted in a decrease in the α-carotene and xanthophyll contents. The relative 
expression levels of DcPSY1, DcPSY2, and DcCHXE were sharply increased in DcLCYE 
knockout mutants. The results of this study provide insights into the function 
of DcLCYE in carrots, which could serve as a basis for creating colorful carrot 
germplasms.

© 2023 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tpj.16275
PMID: 37158657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Agric Food Chem. 2023 May 24;71(20):7765-7776. doi:
10.1021/acs.jafc.3c01492.  Epub 2023 May 10.

Screening of Structurally Distinct Lycopene β-Cyclases for Production of the 
Cyclic C40 Carotenoids β-Carotene and Astaxanthin by Corynebacterium glutamicum.

Göttl VL(1), Pucker B(2), Wendisch VF(1), Henke NA(1).

Author information:
(1)Genetics of Prokaryotes, Faculty of Biology and CeBiTec, Bielefeld 
University, 33615 Bielefeld, Germany.
(2)Institute of Plant Biology & BRICS, TU Braunschweig, 38106 Braunschweig, 
Germany.

Lycopene β-cyclase (EC 5.5.1.19) is one of the key enzymes in the biosynthesis 
of β-carotene and derived carotenoids. It catalyzes isomerase reactions to form 
β-carotene from lycopene by β-cyclization of both of its ψ-ends. Lycopene 
β-cyclases are widespread in nature. We systematically analyzed the phylogeny of 
lycopene β-cyclases from all kingdoms of life and predicted their transmembrane 
structures. To this end, a collection of previously characterized lycopene 
β-cyclase polypeptide sequences served as bait sequences to identify their 
closest homologues in a range of bacteria, archaea, fungi, algae, and plant 
species. Furthermore, a DeepTMHMM scan was applied to search for the presence of 
transmembrane domains. A phylogenetic tree suggests at least five distinct 
clades, and the DeepTMHMM scan revealed that lycopene β-cyclases are a group of 
structurally different proteins: membrane-bound and cytosolic enzymes. 
Representative lycopene β-cyclases were screened in the lycopene-overproducing 
Corynebacterium glutamicum strain for β-carotene and astaxanthin production. 
This systematic screening facilitates the identification of new enzymes for 
carotenoid production. Higher astaxanthin production and less reduction of total 
carotenoids were achieved with the cytosolic lycopene β-cyclase CrtL from 
Synechococcus elongatus and the membrane-bound heterodimeric lycopene β-cyclase 
CrtYcd from Brevibacterium linens.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jafc.3c01492
PMID: 37162369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Metab Eng Commun. 2023 Apr 24;16:e00222. doi: 10.1016/j.mec.2023.e00222. 
eCollection 2023 Jun.

Exploring linker's sequence diversity to fuse carotene cyclase and hydroxylase 
for zeaxanthin biosynthesis.

Bouin A(1)(2), Zhang C(1), Lindley ND(1)(2), Truan G(2), Lautier T(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Singapore Institute of Food and Biotechnology Innovation (SIFBI), Agency for 
Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore.
(2)TBI, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, INRAE, INSA, Toulouse, France.
(3)CNRS@CREATE, 1 Create Way, #08-01 Create Tower, 138602, Singapore.

Fusion of catalytic domains can accelerate cascade reactions by bringing enzymes 
in close proximity. However, the design of a protein fusion and the choice of a 
linker are often challenging and lack of guidance. To determine the impact of 
linker parameters on fusion proteins, a library of linkers featuring various 
lengths, secondary structures, extensions and hydrophobicities was designed. 
Linkers were used to fuse the lycopene cyclase (crtY) and β-carotene hydroxylase 
(crtZ) from Pantoea ananatis to create fusion proteins to produce zeaxanthin. 
The fusion efficiency was assessed by comparing the carotenoids content in a 
carotenoid-producer Escherichia coli strain. It was shown that in addition to 
the orientation of the enzymes and the size of the linker, the first amino acid 
of the linker is also a key factor in determining the efficiency of a protein 
fusion. The wide range of sequence diversity in our linker library enables the 
fine tuning of protein fusion and this approach can be easily transferred to 
other enzyme couples.

© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mec.2023.e00222
PMCID: PMC10165439
PMID: 37168436

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


297. Genes (Basel). 2023 Jun 17;14(6):1284. doi: 10.3390/genes14061284.

A Lycopene ε-Cyclase TILLING Allele Enhances Lycopene and Carotenoid Content in 
Fruit and Improves Drought Stress Tolerance in Tomato Plants.

Petrozza A(1), Summerer S(1), Melfi D(1), Mango T(1), Vurro F(2), Bettelli M(2), 
Janni M(2), Cellini F(1), Carriero F(1).

Author information:
(1)ALSIA Centro Ricerche Metapontum Agrobios, s.s. Jonica 106, km 448.2, 75010 
Metaponto, MT, Italy.
(2)Istituto dei Materiali per l'Elettronica e il Magnetismo (IMEM-CNR), Parco 
Area delle Scienze 37/A, 43121 Parma, Italy.

In the scenario of climate change, the availability of genetic resources for 
tomato cultivation that combine improved nutritional properties and more 
tolerance to water deficiency is highly desirable. Within this context, the 
molecular screenings of the Red Setter cultivar-based TILLING platform led to 
the isolation of a novel lycopene ε-cyclase gene (SlLCY-E) variant (G/3378/T) 
that produces modifications in the carotenoid content of tomato leaves and 
fruits. In leaf tissue, the novel G/3378/T SlLCY-E allele enhances 
β,β-xanthophyll content at the expense of lutein, which decreases, while in ripe 
tomato fruit the TILLING mutation induces a significant increase in lycopene and 
total carotenoid content. Under drought stress conditions, the G/3378/T SlLCY-E 
plants produce more abscisic acid (ABA) and still conserve their leaf carotenoid 
profile (reduction of lutein and increase in β,β-xanthophyll content). 
Furthermore, under said conditions, the mutant plants grow much better and are 
more tolerant to drought stress, as revealed by digital-based image analysis and 
in vivo monitoring of the OECT (Organic Electrochemical Transistor) sensor. 
Altogether, our data indicate that the novel TILLING SlLCY-E allelic variant is 
a valuable genetic resource that can be used for developing new tomato 
varieties, improved in drought stress tolerance and enriched in fruit lycopene 
and carotenoid content.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14061284
PMCID: PMC10298496
PMID: 37372464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


298. Mar Drugs. 2023 Jul 23;21(7):418. doi: 10.3390/md21070418.

Functional Characterization of Lycopene β- and ε-Cyclases from a Lutein-Enriched 
Green Microalga Chlorella sorokiniana FZU60.

Fang H(1)(2)(3)(4), Liu J(1)(2)(3)(4), Ma R(1)(2)(3)(4), Zou Y(5), Ho SH(3)(6), 
Chen J(1)(2)(3)(4), Xie Y(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Marine Biological Manufacturing Center of Fuzhou Institute of Oceanography, 
Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350108, China.
(2)Technical Innovation Service Platform for High-Value and High-Quality 
Utilization of Marine Organism, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350108, China.
(3)Fujian Engineering and Technology Research Center for Comprehensive 
Utilization of Marine Products Waste, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350108, China.
(4)Fuzhou Industrial Technology Innovation Center for High-Value Utilization of 
Marine Products, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350108, China.
(5)College of Life Sciences, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, 
China.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Urban Water Resource and Environment, School of 
Environment, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150090, China.

Lutein is a high-value carotenoid with many human health benefits. Lycopene β- 
and ε-cyclases (LCYB and LCYE, respectively) catalyze the cyclization of 
lycopene into distinct downstream branches, one of which is the lutein 
biosynthesis pathway, via α-carotene. Hence, LCYB and LCYE are key enzymes in 
lutein biosynthesis. In this study, the coding genes of two lycopene cyclases 
(CsLCYB and CsLCYE) of a lutein-enriched marine green microalga, Chlorella 
sorokiniana FZU60, were isolated and identified. A sequence analysis and 
computational modeling of CsLCYB and CsLCYE were performed using bioinformatics 
to identify the key structural domains. Further, a phylogenetic analysis 
revealed that CsLCYB and CsLCYE were homogeneous to the proteins of other green 
microalgae. Subcellular localization tests in Nicotiana benthamiana showed that 
CsLCYB and CsLCYE localized in chloroplasts. A pigment complementation assay in 
Escherichia coli revealed that CsLCYB could efficiently β-cyclize both ends of 
lycopene to produce β-carotene. On the other hand, CsLCYE possessed a strong 
ε-monocyclase activity for the production of δ-carotene and a weak ε-bicyclic 
activity for the production of ε-carotene. In addition, CsLCYE was able to 
catalyze lycopene into β-monocyclic γ-carotene and ultimately produced 
α-carotene with a β-ring and an ε-ring via γ-carotene or δ-carotene. Moreover, 
the co-expression of CsLCYB and CsLCYE in E. coli revealed that α-carotene was a 
major product, which might lead to the production of a high level of lutein in 
C. sorokiniana FZU60. The findings provide a theoretical foundation for 
performing metabolic engineering to improve lutein biosynthesis and accumulation 
in C. sorokiniana FZU60.

DOI: 10.3390/md21070418
PMCID: PMC10381880
PMID: 37504949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


299. Biotechnol Biofuels Bioprod. 2023 Aug 12;16(1):127. doi: 
10.1186/s13068-023-02377-1.

Enhancement of β-carotene content in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii by expressing 
bacterium-driven lycopene β-cyclase.

Huang D(#)(1), Liu C(#)(1)(2), Su M(1), Zeng Z(1), Wang C(1), Hu Z(1), Lou S(3), 
Li H(4).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Engineering Research Center for Marine Algal Biotechnology, 
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory for Plant Epigenetics, Shenzhen Engineering 
Laboratory for Marine Algal Biotechnology, Longhua Innovation Institute for 
Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Oceanography, Shenzhen University, 
Shenzhen, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems of Ministry of Education 
and Guangdong Province, College of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, 
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China.
(3)Guangdong Engineering Research Center for Marine Algal Biotechnology, 
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory for Plant Epigenetics, Shenzhen Engineering 
Laboratory for Marine Algal Biotechnology, Longhua Innovation Institute for 
Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Oceanography, Shenzhen University, 
Shenzhen, China. sllou@szu.edu.cn.
(4)Guangdong Engineering Research Center for Marine Algal Biotechnology, 
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory for Plant Epigenetics, Shenzhen Engineering 
Laboratory for Marine Algal Biotechnology, Longhua Innovation Institute for 
Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Oceanography, Shenzhen University, 
Shenzhen, China. lihui80@szu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

β-Carotene is one of the economically important carotenoids, having functions as 
the antioxidant to remove harmful free radicals and as the precursor for vitamin 
A and other high-valued xanthophyll such as zeaxanthin and astaxanthin. Lycopene 
cyclase plays an important role in the branching of β-carotene and α-carotene. 
Aiming to develop the microalgae with enhanced β-carotene productivity, the CrtY 
gene from bacterium Pantoea agglomerans was integrated into Chlamydomonas 
reinhardtii. The lycopene-producing E. coli harboring CrtY gene produced 1.59 
times of β-carotene than that harboring DsLcyb1 from Dunaliella salina (a 
microalga with abundant β-carotene), confirming the superior activity of CrtY on 
β-carotene biosynthesis. According to the pigment analysis by HPLC, in 
microalgal transformants that were confirmed by molecular analysis, the 
expression of CrtY significantly increased β-carotene content from 12.48 mg/g to 
30.65 mg/g (dry weight), which is about 2.45-fold changes. It is noted that 
three out of five transformants have statistically significant higher amount of 
lutein, even though the increment was 20% in maximum. Besides, no growth defect 
was observed in the transformants. This is the first report of functional 
expression of prokaryotic gene in eukaryotic microalgae, which will widen the 
gene pool targeting carotenoids biosynthesis using microalgae as the factory and 
thereby provide more opportunity for high-valued products engineering in 
microalgae.

© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s13068-023-02377-1
PMCID: PMC10423417
PMID: 37573357

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


300. Int J Biol Macromol. 2023 Sep 4;253(Pt 2):126702. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2023.126702. Online ahead of print.

TgLCYB1 regulated by TgWRKY22 enhances the tolerance of Torreya grandis to 
waterlogging stress.

Liu Z(1), Yan J(1), Wang T(1), Chen W(1), Suo J(2), Yan J(3), Wu J(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Subtropical Silviculture, Zhejiang A&F University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 311300, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Subtropical Silviculture, Zhejiang A&F University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 311300, China. Electronic address: sjw@zafu.edu.cn.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Subtropical Silviculture, Zhejiang A&F University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 311300, China. Electronic address: jingweiyan@zafu.edu.cn.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Subtropical Silviculture, Zhejiang A&F University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 311300, China. Electronic address: wujs@zafu.edu.cn.

β-Carotene functions in plant growth and development and plays an important role 
in resisting abiotic stress, such as drought and salt stress. The specific 
function and mechanism by which β-carotene responds to waterlogging stress, 
however, remain elusive. In this study, we found that β-carotene content and 
lycopene cyclase (TgLCYB1) expression, both in leaves and roots of Torreya 
grandis, were increased under waterlogging treatment. Subcellular localization 
assays indicated that TgLCYB1 was localized in the chloroplasts. Phenotypic, 
physiological, and metabolome analysis showed that overexpression of TgLCYB1 
enhanced the tolerance of tomato plants to waterlogging stress. Furthermore, 
application of a LCYB enzyme inhibitor, 2-(4-chlorophenylthio)-triethylamine 
hydrochloride, markedly enhanced the sensitivity of T. grandis to waterlogging 
stress. In addition, yeast one-hybrid assay, the dual luciferase assay system, 
and real-time quantitative PCR indicated that waterlogging stress induced 
TgWRKY22 to increase TgLCYB1 expression by binding to the TgLCYB1 promoter. 
Collectively, our results indicated that TgWRKY22 positively regulated TgLCYB1 
expression to improve the activities of antioxidant enzyme and increase the 
levels of some key metabolites, thereby relieving waterlogging-induced oxidative 
damage, and consequently modulating the waterlogging stress response. This study 
contributes to a more comprehensive understanding of carotenoid functions and 
the role LCYB genes play in plant stress response.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2023.126702
PMID: 37673161

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.
